COLLECTED FRUITS
OF
OCCULT TEACHING

BY

A. P. SINNETT
AUTHOR OF "THE OCCULT WORLD," "ESOTERIC BUDDHISM"
" THE GROWTH OF THE SOUL," ETC.

First Published In 1919
Second Impression

1920

PREFACE
THEOSOPHICAL literature, from the outset of the
great movement it inaugurated, has been largely
concerned with previously unknown laws governing
the origin and destinies of humanity, the birth
and progress of worlds, the coherent design of
the Solar System and, in short, with the
interpretation, in the light of knowledge till
recently reserved for a very few, of the
stupendous Divine purpose underlying physical
manifestation. My own earlier books, The Occult
World and Esoteric Buddhism, forecast rather than
embodied teaching along such lines, revealing the
existence of those whom I called "the Elder
Brethen of Humanity," who had risen above the
level of generally current civilization, and thus
had touch with the wisdom of the Divine
Hierarchy. An experiment was in progress to
ascertain if ordinary culture had attained a
stage at which it would appreciate a flood of new
thought relating to a science loftier than any
dealing exclusively with phenomena perceptible to
the physical senses, and in connection with that
experiment I was priviliged to receive a
considerable volume of information relating to
the early history of mankind millions of years
antedating the range of historical record; also
to the concatenation of worlds and the ultimate
destinies of our own.
Though crude and incomplete, this preliminary
sketch of occult science and of the agency
through which, though unknown to the multitude,
the purpose of creation was being worked out on
the physical plane, thrilled the readers of the
message all over the civilized world to a extent
which gave rise to an organization, the
Theosophical Society, which now covers Great
Britain, Europe generally, and the United States
of America with innumerable branches. Fresh
teaching and information relating to the great

subjects enumerated above has meanwhile been
flowing into my hands, and much has been embodied
in my book, The Growth of the Soul; also, since
the publication of that book, in a large number
of articles in reviews, pamphlets, and
"Transactions" of the London Lodge of the
Theosophical Society over which I preside. The
present volume collects these scattered
contributions to our super-physical knowledge,
still growing and expanding in its scope and
value. At some later date the fundamental
principles laid down in the earlier books the
illuminating interpretation of these in the
essays now reproduced and further light on
mysteries previously obscure, may constitute
something resembling a complete spiritual
science. But students need not wait for this
result before assimilating the knowledge already
acquired. During this life we are each of us
"imprisoned in the five senses," and, though
thought reaches out far beyond them, its range is
limited by the capacity of the physical brain. In
time that capacity will expand. Ideas easily
grasped by the man of modern culture are beyond
the comprehension of the savage. The improved
intellectual mechanism of future generations will
no doubt deal freely with conceptions which
present culture cannot appreciate. Spiritual
science, however, is an infinitude, and no
attempt to interpret it in physical plane
language will ever be more than suggestive and
alluring.
But it is equally true that human faculty on this
plane of life will develop as time goes on under
the influence of effort to expand its range.
Unconsciously in most students of the spiritual
science within our reach will do more than profit
by understanding it so far. They will have
established a claim on Nature for improved
vehicles of consciousness in later lives, and
will have contributed to raise the level of human
understanding. I am sure the experience of many

theosophists will show that within the limits of
the current life ideas can now be easily handled
in thought, which could not have been held in the
mind during earlier periods of study. These may
still defeat the resources of physical plane
speech, but they forecast intellectual conditions
that will ultimately outrun those resources. That
state of things should be a stimulus to
theosophical study in whatever direction it may
tend, and few of the essays in this volume will
be found destitute of hints that will attract
thought into some new channel of spiritual, or,
at least, of super-physical enlightenment.
In no direction, as we press forward exploring
the mysteries of Nature, may we expect to attain
finality. Broad principles may be firmly
established and at first they seem to be clearly
outlined. Search for detail soon renders the
outline shadowy without suggesting any distrust
of the broad principle. For example, the most
fundamental teaching of Theosophy in relation to
current human life shows us Reincarnation as
essential to the spiritual growth of each Ego. In
one of the essays in this book on Theosophical
Teachings liable to be Misunderstood, so much
detail is added to the original teaching on this
subject that when we absorb this the broad idea
without the detail seems as likely to mislead as
to instruct. Earlier statements concerning the
mechanism of the Solar System, the planetary
chains, the successive "manvantaras," etc., were
vividly significant at first. They remain as
revelations of natural truth that we can never
lose touch with, but surrounded by the later
interpretation dealt with in some of the present
essays, concerning the way in which the planetary
chains are concatenated together and the way in
which the manvantaras expand and contract, the
first sketches of the truth are seen to fail
altogether in showing it illustrative of the
beautiful symmetry and purpose of the Divine
design. Some readers of the earlier books are too

easily satisfied. The genuine occult student will
never stand still. Henry V., preparing for battle
at Agincourt, declared that: "If it be a sin to
covet honour, I am the most offending soul
alive." And the occult student may think of
knowledge - the true knowledge, the comprehension
and appreciation of Divine manifesation - in the
same heroic spirit.

CONTENTS
PAGE

PREFACE

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

THIS WORLD'S PLACE IN THE UNIVERSE

4

-

-

10

FUTURE LIFE - AND LIVES

-

-

-

-

-

28

RELIGION UNDER REPAIR

-

-

-

-

-

47

RELIGION UNDER REPAIR: A REPLY TO PROFESSOR LINDSAY 62
THE OCCULTISM IN TENNYSON'S POETRY

-

-

-

77

CREEDS MORE OR LESS CREDIBLE

-

-

-

-

92

IMPRISONED IN THE FIVE SENSES

-

-

-

-

-

109

OUR VISITS TO THIS WORLD

-

-

-

-

-

127

THE MASTERS AND THEIR METHODS OF INSTRUCTION

-

144

EXPANDED THEOSOPHICAL KNOWLEDGE
THE NATURE OF CONSCIOUSNESS.
THE PLANETARY CHAIN.
THE ASTRAL WORLD.
THE INFINITE FUTURE.
THE PYRAMIDS AND STONEHENGE

-

-

-

-

157

-

-

-

185

-

THEOSOPHICAL TEACHINGS LIABLE TO BE MISUNDERSTOOD 213
THE SUPER-PHYSICAL LAWS OF NATURE

-

-

-

- 232

THE HIGHER OCCULTISM

-

-

-

-

-

-

THE OBJECTS OF THE THEOSOPHICAL SOCIETY

-

-

THE BORDERLAND OF SCIENCE ASTRONOMY, OVERT AND OCCULT.

-

-

-

246
- 254

-

263

1. Nebulæ.
2. Within or Beyond our Universe.
3. Planets, Stars and Atoms.

META-SCIENCE.
Atoms and Ether
Atoms and Misunderstandings.
ARCHÆOLOGY: RELICS OF ANTIQUITY

-

-

-

-

282

CATACLYSMS AND EARTHQUAKES

-

-

-

-

286

POETRY AND THEOSOPHY

-

-

-

-

-

-

295

NOTE

-

-

-

-

-

-

299

-

-

-

-

COLLECTED FRUITS OF
OCCULT TEACHING
THIS WORLD'S PLACE IN THE UNIVERSE
RELIGIOUS emotion was, till recently, at war with
science - expecially indignant with astronomy for
disturbing primitive conceptions as to the way
this world was first opened for business. But a
bold application of the principle that biblical
language need not be taken at the foot of the
letter gradually enlarged its interior meaning
until the rotundity and annual revolution of the
earth were fitted in to the story told in
Genesis. Evolution as accounting for the human
form then came within sight of a gloomy
toleration - if Modernists insisted on it. That,
however, which religious emotion has not quite
realized is the sublime truth that, the more we
are enabled to penetrate the deep mysteries of
Nature, the more profoundly reverent we become in
contemplating the impenetrable infinitudes of
that Divine Power which operates alike in guiding
the growth of protoplasm and the majestic
mechanism of the Solar System. Critics who
preferred - when Darwin first shattered the
paraphernalia of medieval theology, like a bull
in a china shop - to remain on the side of the
Angels, made the immense mistake of supposing
that the Angels (regarded as agents of Divinity)
would be disestablished if we began to approach
an understanding of the way they did their work.
A view growing familiar with some students of
Nature involves the idea that even natural forces
are the expression of conscious will on some
exalted levels of spiritual potency; that the socalled "laws" of Nature are definite Divine
enactments - not merely blind attributes of
matter. And we can hardly begin to form a

rational conception of the world's development
under Divine control without including this idea
in our thinking.
The reconciliation of religion and science has
been advancing by leaps and bounds of late, and
"Seven Men of Science," all of the foremost rank,
recently published a collection of addresses
frankly declaring their belief in God, as a
fundamental idea underlying scientific study. The
record of the old "Conflict" is now ancient
history. But this result is not a conclusion. It
is only a beginning. The seven scientific
leaders, quite in agreement as regards the main
proposition, may be groping in various directions
in the search for a definite mental picture of
the God in whom they believe. Perhaps all would
admit that the reality does not lend itself to
the formation of a mental picture. Religion
reconstructed on scientific principles must build
up a conception of Divinity by working from below
upward. The earlier fashion attempted to work
from above downward. "In the beginning" certain
things happened, we were told - by teachers who,
quite reasonably in dealing with young people,
ignored the idea that Eternity has no beginning.
But now that embryology must be recognized as a
method of creation when we talk about the human
form we feel the need of an embryology as applied
to planetary creation. And so we come to
recognize the subtle, mysterious laws of organic
growth - not as displacing the Divine creative
Will, but as the agency by which it is fulfilled
in physical manifestation.
So by degrees, with help available at the present
day, for those especially who realize that human
consciousness can be reached by other channels of
perception besides the five senses, we reach the
idea that Divine agency is worked out through an
enormously elaborate and magnificent hierarchy of
Spiritual Beings, beyond whom, in dazzling and
(as yet) impenetrable mystery, there exists an

incomprehensibly sublime Power, of whom the Sun
may be thought of as the physical symbol.
In the mental search for God we may pause at this
stage of the effort. Human intelligence is more
limited in its scope than early philosophers
imagined, but is quite limitless as regards its
expectations. It presumes to talk about the
Divine power which accounts for the whole
universe. Distant stars, though to be counted by
millions and mostly gigantic compared with the
star, or Sun, to which we belong, must come into
the same creative scheme as the sparrows in
Kensington Gardens. The Sunday School teacher can
be content with nothing less than a God who is
responsible for the Milky Way as well as for the
milky mothers of the field. And medieval painters
have even presented us with his portrait. In some
foreign gallery I have seen him included in a
family group - the Father with a long beard is in
an armchair with the Third Person of the Trinity
as a pigeon perched on the back, and the Son in a
chair of somewhat lesser dignity beside him.
Enlightened members of the English Church would
generally be shocked at this grossly
materialistic presentation of the Divine Mystery,
forgetful of their own declaration of belief that
Christ ascended into Heaven and "sitteth on the
right hand of God, the Father Almighty." From The
Fudge Family in Paris we learn that a certain
forcible expression, impossible in English,
"doesn't sound half so shocking in French," and
on the same principle an idea merely formulated
in words that no one stops to invest with a
meaning is not half so shocking as the same idea
depicted on canvas by means of oil colour.
In the days of the old "Conflict" those who dealt
with it - Draper and others - dwelt especially on
the savage ferocity with which the early Church
endeavoured to stifle astronomical discovery.
Faith, at that time, might have been correctly
described as "the faculty that enables us to

believe what we know to be untrue." It was
endangered by the astronomical emphasis of the
untruthfulness in question, but in the long run,
as astronomy held the field, faith fell into line
with discovery, and in spite of ecclesiastical
opposition became ennobled in character. The God
of a Semitic tribe might with an effort of
imagination be fitted into an armchair. The God
of a Solar System, including a central Sun many
thousand times bigger than the Earth - and the
orbit of Neptune thousands of million miles in
diameter - was in a different order of magnitude.
And if we attempt to strain imagination by
looking upward in thought at that inconceivable
splendour, we may realize the futility of the
effort by attempting to gaze directly with open
eyes on a fine day at the physical Sun. Human
sight will not tolerate the unveiled light. Human
understanding will not bring the God-idea, once
cleared of blundering theology, to a definite
focus.
But astronomical discovery does not come to a
standstill even after measuring the orbit of
Neptune and accounting for the canals of Mars,
nor after attempting, however unsuccessfully, to
set time limits to the radiant energy of the Sun.
We are all agreed - though astronomy affords
scope for disagreement in some directions - that
the whole Solar System - the Sun attended by his
family of planets - is moving through space at
about the rate of twelve to fourteen miles per
second. Whither is it bound? Greenwich
authorities would hardly yet venture on a
definite reply, but we may if we like indulge, in
connection with that question, in the fascinating
pursuit known to science as "extrapolation" - the
application to regions of thought outside the
range of definite observation, of the assumption
that laws operative within that range hold good
to infinitudes beyond. Almost all the Heavenly
bodies - quite all if we merely except meteorites
and some comets - move in elliptical orbits more

or less closely approximating to the circular
form. Plainly, it is much more probable that the
Sun's motion is in conformity with this general
principle, than that it is a blind rush in a
straight course, which would infallibly in the
long run give rise to a cosmic catastrophe. If
the uniformities of Nature are maintained, the
Sun must be revolving in an orbit around some
definite sidereal centre. Obviously such an orbit
must be so vast that any measurable arc will
appear to be a straight line.
Now I must venture to outrun even extrapolation
in the explanation I have to give. I have been
permitted in the pages of the Nineteenth Century
to maintain the positon that, in the course of
the present "Armageddon," Unseen Powers embodying
loftier knowledge than common humanity has yet
reached are taking part in the struggle. Some of
us in conscious touch with them are sometimes
with their help enabled to anticipate scientific
discovery. In that way I was concerned, some
dozen years before the discovery of Radium, with
anticipations relating to the constitution of
matter, ultimately verified by that discovery and
subsequent work based on it. Happily those
anticipations were published at the time, so
their character as a successful forecast is not
open to dispute. In another direction certain
future conclusions in connection with astronomy
may be anticipated in their turn. The centre
around which the Solar System is gravitating will
be found to be the star Sirius. Common knowledge
gives us an approximate measure of some stellar
distances. The figure accepted by astronomers for
the moment as the distance of Sirius, taking
"light-years" as the unit, is 8.8, or call it
eight and three-quarters. A light-year is the
distance light crosses in a year, moving at the
rate of 186,000 miles per second. So it would be
inconvenient to give stellar distances in miles.
Moreover, there is a wide margin for possible
errors in calculations concerned with the

parallax of stars. Perhaps it will be found that
Sirius is a bit farther off than the currently
accepted calculation assumes, but anyhow the real
distance is in the same order of magnitude.
Estimates of the size and luminosity of Sirius
vary very widely - from 300 to 1000 times the
size and brighness of our Sun, but either guess
fits in with the main idea to be grasped.
Obviously our Sun cannot be the only one that
revolves around Sirius. Directly that idea is
appreciated, we realize that Sirius must be the
central sun of a vast system, in which such suns
as ours must be, to Sirius, what the planets are
to our Sun.
That this is so, can only be ascertained
definitely by those in touch with sources of
information not yet within general reach, but at
all events, meanwhile, as a hypothesis, the
statement is clearly in harmony with the
uniformities of Nature. To regard our Solar
System and all the others presumably represented
by the millions of stars in the sky, as scattered
at random about space would be insulting to
Supreme Wisdom and Omnipotence. The conception
could only be acceptable to thinkers at the
kindergarten stage. Certainly up to the middle of
the last century grown and grave men did discuss
the question whether this was the only inhabited
world in the Universe, but increasing
intelligence has rendered us at once wiser and
more modest than when a doubt on that subject was
possible. I need not go over the evidence that
makes an important group of astronomers certain
that Mars (to confine our attention for a moment
to our own Solar System) is the abode of life not
entirely unlike our own. The other planets may
not have climatic conditions like our own, but
the resources of Nature may easily provide
vehicles of life appropriate to any conditions of
temperature; while those of us who know something
more about life, consciousness and spiritual
growth than mere surgery would suggest, regard

with disdain the idea that any worlds - whether
around our sun or in the infinitudes of space can be mere inanimate masses of matter destitute
of the loftier purposes that life implies.
Just for the present all information relating to
the Sirian Cosmos must remain hypothetical until
the astronomy of the future overtakes the
forecast, but its value as illuminating reverent
imagination reaching in the direction of Divinity
is very great. It helps us to realize that in all
such upward reaching we must blend with the idea
of which we are in search, the idea of infinity.
In the search within the limits of our own Solar
System we are hopelessly dazzled long before we
touch those limits. But the conception of the
Sirian Cosmos shows us that incomprehensible as
the Solar Divinity may be - "That" (our miserable
word "he" is degrading in such use) can only be
in some dependent relationship to the Divinity
guiding the whole Syrian Cosmos; in other words
that "God" is an infinite hierarchy. Faintly we
realize that God - when we think of the Sirian
Cosmos - is, in some wholly incomprehensible way,
greater even (in a stupendous degree) than God,
when we think of the Solar System and of the
various worlds within it of which ours is one.
And, indeed, human intelligence, limited in its
grasp of detail, unlimited when reaching out
toward infinitude, preceives, the moment this
last idea is touched, that the Sirian Cosmos
itself must be in relationship with some still
more expanded and sublime organism; that Sirius
cannot be a stationary body but must itself,
attended by all its family of solar systems, be
dependent on some other centre of energy, on some
other superior manifestation of the infinite God.
It is futile even to speculate as to where or
what that centre may be, but the feeling that it
must exist vaguely hints at a unity pervading the
whole visible universe. Along that line of
thought, however, lies a mental bewilderment that
bars further progress. We can play in imagination

still with astronomical figures. The bright star
Arcturus is said to be 140 light-years distant
from us, and yet it shines nearly as brilliantly
as Sirius. What must be its actual magnitude and
lustre? What must be its place in the universal
scheme? And some other stars of almost equivalent
brilliancy are beyond parallactic measurement
altogether. But the purpose which all fulfil must
be within the grasp of infinite Divinity.
Science, growing more and more intimately welded
with spiritual aspiration as human intelligence
expands, grants us some human illumination as we
seek to penetrate, so far as that may be
possible, the mysteries of the Divine Hierarchy.
Certainly, if we turn our attention from the
appalling magnitudes of astronomy to the
phenomena of the infinitely little, the
measurements we have to deal with are equally
bewildering. Physicists tell us that a cubic
centimetre of water contains thirty trillions of
molecules. That if a glass globe four inches in
diameter were absolutely empty and air molecules
admitted at the rate of a hundred millions a
second 50,000 years would elapse before the globe
was full. Such figures are more amusing than
instructive, but they may help us,to some extent,
in our attempt to formulate a conception of the
Divine Hierarchy. The attributes of the physical
molecules - the laws they obey, are obviously as
much an expression of Divine Will as the forces
that regulate the march of solar systems in the
Sirian Cosmos. Within our Solar System the Divine
Hierarchy extends downward, as definitely as,
beyond it, it extends upward; and though, as we
attempt to understand it in its lower levels, we
shall soon find mental difficulties almost as
insuperable as those attending efforts in the
other direction, we can, with help from certain
sources of information, arrive at some
intelligible conclusions.
Astronomy may still help us to some extent. The

conditions that must attend life in the various
planets of our system must obviously differ very
widely. Temperature may vary from below that of
ice to above that of steam. Vehicles of
consciousness - bodies of whatever matter may be
suitable, must vary accordingly. We may safely
assume that while some of the fundamental laws of
Nature may hold good throughout the system,
others, for example all appertaining to organic
growth, may need local modification. Each world
must be controlled, even as regards its physical
manifestation, by appropriate Divine Agency. And
very little progress beyond primitive theology
makes us sure that, - first of all as regards our
own world - there are teeming regions of life
that lie beyond the cognition of the physical
senses. Talk therefore of our familiar planets
should properly relate to planetary schemes,
embracing much more than visible globes. So we
reach the conception that for each planetary
scheme the Divine will of the whole Solar System
must transmit itself through an agency that is
still so Divine in its character as to dazzle our
mental sight.
None the less a very important stage in our study
of the Divine Hierarchy is reached when we
realize the principle of agency as working
through it. The mind leaps to the conclusion that
this principle must be operative right down to
the subtle activities of Nature that we are in
the habit of summing up in the word "Evolution."
For the verification of this conjecture we must
obviously be dependent on information received
from those sources of super-physical knowledge
above referred to, such information in turn being
only subject to the check imposed by our own
critical faculties. Does it appeal to our
intelligence as essentially reasonable in its
character? Leaving that question to be determined
later, I will first endeavour to describe the
agency through which the purpose of the Divine
Power presiding over the planetary scheme to

which this world belongs, appears to be worked
out in physical manifestation.
We have to think of the Unseen realms of Nature
as inhabited by hosts of spiritual beings
concerned with the direction of the forces
(emanating from super-Divine Will) which not
merely guide organic growth but provide for the
growth of the spiritual essence with which such
growth is associated. Language is apt to break
down in one's hands as a means of conveying ideas
that are inextricably blended with still more
subtle underlying ideas. We are living in a world
the whole raison d'être of which resides in the
opportunity it affords for the growth and
expansion of spiritual consciousness. The
experiences of consciousness in association with
physical environment are the conditions providing
for its growth. We may plunge down in search of
the beginnings of such growth to levels of
consciousness far below those of humanity. But
leaving that vast area of thought untrodden, the
growth of spiritual consciousness as focussed in
humanity is itself under the guidance of Divine
agency whose perfect uniformity of intention,
fulfilling the Divine purpose, would, if we could
see only a little more clearly, present to
imagination a system of natural law on the moral
plane as unalterable as the natural laws relating
to physical matter that we deal with in the
chemist's laboratory. Those natural laws of the
moral plane are entangled with variable
influences arising from human free will, but that
only renders the task of the Divine agents who
guide them more delicate, not less specific.
The first glimpses we get in this way, of the
intricacy of the work carried out by the hosts of
Divine agents engaged un guiding the world's
growth, prepare us to find that a distribution of
function is carried out in that wonderful realm
of activity, so that while one great host is
concerned with the growth of consciousness,

another is concentrated on the task of guiding
the growth of form - of carrying out the idea
that, for want of a better comprehension of the
process, we call the principle of Evolution. And
such agency works again in its contact with
matter through lower agency right down to the
manipulation of the molecule. The Divine
Hierarchy is infinite in both ways; inconceivably
exalted and inconceivably minute, but in the
direction of minutiæ still conscious and
purposeful. Intelligence, with a certain range of
freedom within limits, guides not only the
gradual improvement of the human form, pari passu
with the progress of spiritual growth, but the
humbler development of form in the animal kingdom
and even variation in the colouring of plants and
flowers. The agency concerned with such work
cannot be discerned by the physical senses, but
finer senses can already sometimes cognize its
operation, though most of us are still too young
in evolution to have come into full possession of
all the faculties latent in human nature. "We are
ancients of the earth and in the morning of the
times."
So brief a sketch as this must be content in some
directions with mere faint hints. How do the
Divine agents concerned, as declared above, with
the evolution of form translate their
superphysical powers to the physical plane? The
answer has to do with what may be called the
semi-intelligent mechanism of Nature. The mere
phrase is bewildering, but it deals with certain
aspects of Nature that science must concern
itself with before long. "Elemental Agency"
cannot properly be regarded as belonging to the
Divine Hierarchy even in its lower levels, but it
constitutes a vast subsidiary evolution by
itself; cosmic in its character: related to much
more than the interests of this world alone;
beginning on levels commensurate with the
electron in magnitude and importance, rising to
conditions in which definite forms in certain

fine orders of matter are identifiable by
observers, with adequately clairvoyant senses, as
associated with specific functions in Nature.
Elementals constitute the link between will human or Divine - and physical manifestation.
Obviously the subject is one of stupendous
magnitude. No fire could burn, no plant could
grow, no human being could live on the physical
plane, and carry on all that business transacted
within his body of which he is wholly
unconscious, without elemental agency. When
science comes to grapple with the intricacies of
this so far hidden aspect of Nature, it will look
back to its present condition as one barely
emerging from the dark ages.
Thus vast and complicated is the agency by which
Divine Will is fulfilled. But we have to struggle
as best we may with the idea of hierarchies
within hierarchies. The world is a theatre in
which a stupendous drama is in process of
performance. The scenery and decorations are
provided by Divine agency, and the actors are
responsible - if we push the metaphor to its
extreme limits - for the parts they play. In
other words, while Divine agency invests them
with their opportunity, their own free will is
left to determine the use they make of this. But
they must not be allowed to wreck the whole
undertaking by too gross a misuse of that free
will. The drama is intended to have a happy
ending. So over and above or apart from the
hierarchies that provide the conditions Divine
ordination provides for a governing hierarchy
that does not actually control the actors - put
words into their mouths, so to speak, or manage
them like marionettes - but causes them to feel
disagreeable consequences from blundering;
invests them with larger consciousness as they
willingly fall into line with the Divine idea. Of
course that governing hierarchy is merged in its
loftier levels with the superior agents of
infinite Divinity, but on its less exalted levels

is in close touch with our own humanity. This
thought leads up to what is perhaps the most
important idea of all that I have been
endeavouring to suggest. Humanity itself recruits
the governing hierarchy. Its members on the first
important level above ordinary humanity have
been, at some remote periods in the past, human
beings like (the best of) ourselves. We speak of
them now, those of us who have the privilege of
more or less knowing them, as great adepts,
Masters of Wisdom, Brothers of the Great White
Lodge, or by any other phrases approximately
appropriate. They are in normal periods equal to
the task - under Divine inspiration of which
they, of course, are vividly conscious - of
carrying on the government of the world in so far
as it needs adjustment or interference. They are
our Allies in this ghastly abnormal period in
which humanity is confronted by an attack from
such elevated levels of spiritual potency that,
great as their power undoubtedly is, they can
only for the moment resist the awful unseen foe
inspiring our physical plane enemies, whilst
awaiting intervention, ultimately certain if it
becomes necessary, from lofty levels of Divine
Power.
Will this view of the great current crisis seem,
to some critics, at variance with the main idea
that this world, like all others, is governed by
an infinite Divine Hierarchy of quite limitless
capacity and directing human evolution from the
realms of infinite Love? The problem has been
dealt with at some length in articles for the
Nineteenth Century,¹ and need only be referred to
now. Freewill, in one word, is the answer. The
ultimate evolution of individual humanity can
only be accomplished by investing each unit with
the Divine attribute of freewill in a greater or
less degree. Half-fledged humanity of the kind
around us in abundance is hardly conscious of the
extent to which it enjoys this attribute. It
becomes more and more available as spiritual

evolution proceeds. By the hypothesis it may be
exerted to fulfil the purpose of Divine love, in
so far as that may be discerned, or it may be
perverted to antagonize that purpose. Within the
limits of our humanity the perversion may not be
carried to any extreme degree. But other
humanities have preceded our own and have reached
exalted conditions in which free will for good or
evil was enormously expanded in its scope. In
that way it has come to pass that spiritual evil
has assumed colossal proportions until at last it
has challenged Divine Power on very high levels.
That is the challenge with which we, on our
humble level, are now contending. We feel sure of
ultimate success because the mighty spiritual
powers of evil, at war with the Divine idea of
humanity (on this plane with ourselves, the
Allied armies) have had a definite origin that we
can discern and have reached a definite height of
spiritual power. However exalted that power, it
is finite. The Divine Hierarchy is infinite. At
whatever level Satanic power may confront it on
equal terms, Divine resources above that level
are limitless. If exerted they must subdue the
finite power, and we have reason to feel sure
that sooner or later they will be exerted to
avert the ruin of the world.
_____________
¹ "Our Unseen Enemies and Allies" and "When the Dark
Hosts are Vanquished," Nineteenth Century and After,
October and November, 1915.

I have said that our Allies in this great
struggle - the Masters of Wisdom, or by whatever
name we like to call them - the Chieftains of
humanity, of whose existence, till recent years,
humanity at large was wholly ignorant, are
recruited from amongst ourselves although none
the less constituting the first great stage of
advancement, counting from below upward, of the
Divine Hierarchy. But while, beyond them,
conditions of existence begin to transcend

physical brain comprehension we can understand to
some extent the capacities and powers of the
beings who have attained to them, and the
functions appertaining to their stage of
evolution. Certainly that mighty organization
includes some who reached high spiritual dignity
before this world's children had emerged from
early races, in one sense their nursery. But none
the less it includes some who have been to
outward appearance within historic periods mere
ordinary men. The world, indeed, has never been
without a great ruling Brotherhood, though at one
time it was indebted for this to a Senior
humanity. The phrase needs amplification to be
fully intelligible, but a very little thought
will give reason to the idea that the history of
this world and of our human races is not a
"complete short story," in itself, but an episode
in universal history.
As our humanity became sufficiently evolved to
furnish recruits for the great ruling Brotherhood
its existence was allowed to filter out gradually
into the consciousness of the few candidates
available. These were the few whose ardour in the
pursuit of lofty knowledge and whose moral
development were such that they could be trusted
not to misuse enhanced knowledge. The world at
large was not generally ripe for the proper
appreciation of the fact that powers and
knowledge beyond ordinary experience were
attainable by certain means. A premature
dissemination of that idea might have had
unfortunate consequences. But for the chosen few
it was revealed, and so it has come to pass that
at the present day the great Brotherhood includes
many members who have been men like (the best of)
ourselves within a comparatively recent period.
Experience of ordinary life does not enable us to
understand their place in Nature altogether and
completely. They work to an great extent on
planes of consciousness beyond the cognition of

the ordinary senses. They wield forces as yet
unknown to Science, using the physical body
merely as a vehicle to be occupied or left aside
as convenience may suggest: the finest
clairvoyance which ordinary students of that
wonderful faculty have ever met with is, compared
with theirs, a rushlight to an electric arc; and
physical matter itself is plastic in their hands.
In the higher vehicles of consciousness distances
about the world mean nothing, and withal they are
of course in absolute harmony with the Divine
Will.
The view thus reached - that shows us the
humanity to which we all belong as designed to
recruit the first, as we look upward, of the
spiritual degrees that in the aggregate
constitute the Divine Hierarchy - is of supreme
significance. Properly understood it invests
humanity with an entirely new meaning, as
compared with that which merely treats each item
in that humanity as destined to an infinitely
continued individual existence, happy or unhappy,
as the case may be. The crude fancy thus
presented to the mind by commonplace religion may
have served its purpose while the world was
young, as coaxing or warning an ignorant
multitude not yet ripe for a more profound
conception, but philosophically it is beneath
criticism. The sublime idea, as directly
affecting ourselves, to be derived from a
conception, even if only broad and incomplete, of
the Divine Hierarchy is that which shows it to be
a coherent entirety stretching upward from this
world as we know it, in the direction of absolute
infinity. It enables us, for the first time, to
comprehend this world's place in the Universe. A
misdirected modesty leads some of us occasionally
to talk of this world as a small planet amongst
many greater, attached to a tenth-rate sun in the
Universe richly stocked with others of enormously
greater magnitude and brilliancy. The
infinitesimal creatures on its surface can only

be regarded, in this way, as important in their
own estimation; no more so really than the grains
of sand on the seashore. That view is no less
erroneous than depressing. The humanity for the
sake of evolving which this world exists,
represents a definite stage in the evolution of
Divine consciousness, which, besides its
limitless expansion towards infinity, is
susceptible of infinite accretion from below.
There are no stages in the Divine Hierarchy that
have not been recruited, in some unfathomable
past, from humanities more or less resembling our
own. Eternity stretches both ways and the world the solar systems of to-day, though figures would
fail to suggest their duration as measured in our
time - are manifestations of Divine power that
have succeeded others and will be in turn
succeeded. We count the nebulæ in the Heavens,
and watch the growth of future suns destined to
bear their progeny of future worlds and future
candidates for Divine evolution.
But we need not torment imagination by following
that thought too far. It is enough to know that
here and now we are candidates for Divine
evolution; that there is no solution of
continuity from this stage of existence up to
those that have been faintly suggested in these
pages and are hopelessly dazzling to mental
vision as we dwell in though on their attributes
and power. This humanity of ours, even as we
contemplate its visible varieties from the savage
to the greatest philosopher, is obviously a vast
procession moving through the ages, each immortal
spirit ever seeking new and new incarnations till
gathered experience and effort entitle it to
those of the loftiest order. The appreciation of
this idea marks a huge advance beyond the
primitive conception of an eternal perpetuation
of each grotesquely incomplete being. But such an
appreciation is merely a step in the direction of
the grander conception. The highest level of
moral and intellectual attainment on the stage of

this world's potentialities is but as new
beginning, a point of departure for a progress
beyond the precise comprehension of physically
incarnate intelligence, but happily not
altogether veiled from our view. No matter for
the moment whether there be other worlds
affording still more favourable opportunities for
embodied consciousness. That is no concern of
ours. We may be fully content to know that
however the preparatory processes leading up to
the Divine Hierarchy may be provided for in other
worlds, this of ours has a place in the Universe
in direct relation with all the infinitudes that
simple word represents - with all that the most
illuminated reverence can suggest when we presume
to speak of God.

FUTURE LIFE - AND LIVES
NATURALLY enough the tragedies of the War have
imparted thrilling interest to some questions
carelessly disregarded by the multitude during
normal periods. Is there an after life for all of
us when we "die"? Can we find out anything about
it in advance? Can we communicate with those who
have already passed on? Most current essays
dealing with such perplexities have a ludicrous
aspect for millions of spiritualists in constant
touch with departed friends, for all occult
students and for most psychic researchers. A
writer in these pages last month calmly asserts
that communication with the dead "has never been
definitely proved to be anything but delusion or
fraud." If equally ignorant in other directions
he might deal in the same way with any scientific
discovery, say, the retrograde motion of some
planetary satellites, or the transmutations of
radium. The vast literature of spiritualism is
flooded with proof of the main idea. More
recently the literature of occult research is
rich in detail concerning the conditions of the
after life.¹ To say that knowledge thereof has
made "no substantial progress whatever" is like
asserting that since Galvani's experiment with
frogs' legs our knowledge of electricity has made
no progress whatever. Raymond, attracting
deserved attention on account of its authorship,
is only the latest contribution to inumerable
records of a similar kind, the cumulative
significance of which is overwhelming, while all
who are patient and painstaking get personal
conviction for themselves.
_____________
¹ Simply to show that I am not talking at random I will
mention a few books the perusal of which would guard
writers of a certain class from making themselves
ridiculous: Spirit Identity, Psychography, The Higher
Aspects of Spiritualism, Spirit Teachings, A Wanderer in
Spirit Lands, The Story of Ahrinziman, Colloquies with an
Unseen Friend, Out of the Vortex, After Death, Not Silent

though Dead, In the Next World, Do Thoughts Perish? The
Hidden Side of Things, The Inner Life, Esoteric Buddhism,
The Growth of the Soul, The Occult World, The Secret
Doctrine, A Study in Consciousness, The Ancient Wisdom.
Some of the books named relate to Spiritualism, some to
Theosophy or occult science generally. They are a mere
handful compared with any complete bibliography of either
subject.

Spiritualists for the most part are content with
this. They know their departed friends still live
and get assurance of their welfare. They look
forward wih confidence to their own future.
Occult students find that, besides evidence of
that order, minute information relating to the
conditions of the after life can be obtained by
people still in this life when gifted with
clairvoyant faculties of an appropriate kind.
Abundant information is accumulating in the
literature of occult research along these lines.
In no department of human activity has more
remarkable progress been made during the last
thirty years than in this branch of superphysical
science. That progress has carried the occult
student far beyond elementary discoveries
relating to the immediate experiences of the next
life. Certainly these are intensely interesting,
but do not in themselves enable us to obtain a
comprehensive grasp of the whole scheme of
evolution to which humanity belongs.
Comprehension of the next phase of life marks a
great advance beyond the crass ignorance that
doubts or denies even that, but it only helps us
relatively a little way in the direction of
understanding our place in Nature and our
ultimate destinies. Later developments of occult
science enable us to appreciate both the value
and limitations of spiritualism. The mediumship
on which it relies is better understood now than
at first. Physical phenomena are brought about
when certain invisible factors in the medium's
constitution can be withdrawn for use by
elemental agency. Messages come through when
certain organs in the medium's body respond to

subtle vibrations that most people fail to
perceive. But the medium in either case is a
passive instrument in the hands of invisible
operators, and these are of all varieties. That
accounts for the nonsense that often discredits
the method. The lower regions of the next world
swarm with the (morally and intellectually) lower
classes of humanity dying constantly by the
thousands, and (for a time at all events)
remaining as unintelligent as they were in life.
Their influences and messages are ignoble and
stupid, but even then they serve their purpose.
They show us in touch with another plane of
existence. And meanwhile more enlightened
inhabitants of that plane also communicate as the
literature of spiritualism shows.
But spiritualism, having broken down the deadly
materialism into which thought was drifting
during the last century, paved the way for the
development of occult science. The later
literature referred to above illuminates its
origin and progress. The new view of Evolution,
of human destiny, and the economy of Nature
generally, which it has unfolded for us, cannot
be fully interpreted within the limits of a
Review article, but may be broadly suggested.
The stupendous conception of the future which
shows that physical life has spiritual progress
for its purpose, that this world is the region in
which that progress has to be accomplished, that
other realms of existence are the regions in
which the work done here bears fruit, and
provides for invigorating rest, leads us to the
important conception that each physical life is
merely one of a series; that whatever experiences
intervene between each we shall all of us come
back again and again to life of the kind we are
familiar with here, that Reincarnation is as
certain a law of Nature as the circulation of the
blood.

Reincarnation when first scientifically defined
some thirty-odd years ago was quickly seen to
solve many previously insoluble problems. The
hideous inequalities of human condition no longer
seemed to insult Divine justice. Suffering became
intelligible when the conditions of each new life
were realized as the consequences of previous
"doing" (or Karma). The superficial objection,
that the sufferer did not remember his former
misdoing, was dissipated as we realized that the
Higher Self did so, and profited by each physical
plane experience. Further knowledge showed that
humanity is still in its youth. A few more
advanced than the multitude do remember former
lives. The whole course of reasoning need not be
repeated here. The appreciation of rebirth as
essential to a comprehension of human life is
already widely spread. By reason of
misunderstanding details many people regard it
with dislike, and the dislike has been
accentuated by the eagerness of those who seized
upon it at first to deal with it as though it
covered all mysteries of the future. To think of
the future as simply a return to this life is as
great a blunder as to think of the life which
opens up to the person just set free from the
physical body, by its death, as entering an
everlasting existence of a super-physical order.
Only by failing to understand it correctly can
anyone fall into the habit of criticising the
Divine scheme of evolution unfavourably. The
personality of a brutal criminal in the slums is
clearly not fit for eternal perpetuation. The
bishop in his palace, if he honestly considers
the matter, will come to the same conclusion as
regards himself. "We are ancients of the Earth,"
etc., and, as we look back on those who millions
of years ago were more ancient still, we can see
how better worth perpetuation we shall be when
wider experiences of life shall have lifted us as
far beyond our present condition as we now are
beyond that of our Stone Age predecessors ourselves in former lives. Probably, indeed,

there will be no stage of growth from which the
perpetuation of that stage would be conceivable.
Spiritual progress must be infinite, but with
that which lies beyond the perfection of humanity
we can only be concerned much later on. Our
present purpose should be to understand the laws
of reincarnation so as to realize that it does
not conflict in any way with the wide-ranging
possibilities of life on higher realms after
bodily death, and to understand that life so as
to realize that it does not interfere with the
necessity of returning here to gather fresh
experience and get ready for loftier spiritual
enlightenment on happier levels again. Those of
us who have taken adequate advantage of modern
opportunities need not speculate about the
chances of survival after death. That is utterly
familiar knowledge, and, with varying facilities,
many of us are in communication with friends who
have passed on, though it does not always happen
that these have acquired any scientific
comprehension of their own destinies beyond the
stage actually reached. Even or those of us here
who have taken best advantage of current
opportunities there are horizons beyond which our
knowledge does not extend, but the region in
which people wake up after they have discarded
the physical vehicle of consciousness is already
a pays de conaissance for many of us, and there
pathos as well as absurdity in the fact that, for
much larger numbers, conventional teaching has
left them still in doubt whether there is any
waking up at all.
"The Astral Plane" is the term generally used by
occultists to designate the vast realm of unseen
life immediately surrounding this globe. It is
not a well-chosen term, as the region in question
has nothing to do with the stars, but it has
become rooted in occult phraesology, and we
cannot now escape from its use. It is really a
vast concentric sphere of matter that does not
appeal to our physical senses; far greater in

size than the physical globe it embraces,
including an enormous variety of conditions, some
of them highly disagreeable; but of these it is
needless to speak for the moment, as the vast
majority of decently behaved people will have
nothing to do with them but will pass at once,
when free of the body, to regions where they will
find themselves happier than they are likely to
have ever been, even under favourable
circumstances, in the physical life. Naturally
the character of such happiness is determined by
the use that has been made of the earth life and
the extent of spiritual development that the Soul
(or Ego) has reached in its long progress through
the ages, its innumerable immersions in physical
life, its former incarnations. The distribution
of the varied conditions is well understood by
those among us whose faculties are equal to the
task of cognizing astral conditions, but for
people who are not merely without such faculties,
but have not been in touch with those who do
enjoy them, some explanation is needed in
reference to matter and sense-perception.
Without plunging into metaphysics in the
direction of Berkeley it is obvious that the
reality of matter for us is due to the appeal it
makes to our senses. Even on this plane some
kinds of matter - most gases - make no appeal to
the sense of sight, but we know of them by means
of other senses, other avenues to consciousness.
But most of us have no senses through which
astral matter can affect our consciousness. Many,
however, have, and that is the whole secret of
"clairvoyance" the actuality of which as a
faculty in some people is no longer the subject
of any sane denial. Clairvoyants can in some
cases see the forms in which astral life is
expressed. For the most part their astral senses
are partially smothered by their association with
physical senses. Those, however, who can - as the
phrase goes - get out of the body, and exist
prematurely in the astral plane, in the vehicle

of consciousness that will not be in perfect
order for use until the physical body, at death,
is finally got rid of, such persons become at
once fully conscious of the astral realm, and this is the important point to realize - cease
for the time to be conscious of the physical
realm. It does not exist for them any more than
the astral world exists for the commonplace man
in the street. All this is not guesswork or
metaphysical speculation. It is the definite
result of observation as scientific in its
character as that concerned with astronomy or
spectrascopic analysis. And the final result is
that we are now in a position to know that when
we look up into the sky and see nothing between
us and the stars, we are really looking through a
realm as rich in detail as the landscape we can
see on a fine day from a mountain top. This
region is inhabited by myriads of the human
family, amongst them any we have lost and will
rejoin in due time, pending, at a far remoter
date, our return together to this laborious
nether world in which we have to work for any
grand results above that may crown our ultimate
endeavours.
The astral world is not merely a concentric
sphere surrounding the physical globe, it is one within another - a series of concentric
spheres, generally spoken of by occult scientists
as "sub-planes." Counting from below upwards, the
first and second, actually immersed in the body
of the earth, are regions of suffering with which
none but the very worst offenders against Divine
laws have anything to do. The third sub-plane,
above the earth's surface, is still a comfortless
region in which people who have been too deeply
absorbed by the lower interests of physical life
may have to spend a period of purification before
ascending to happier levels; but this vast and
highly varied range of experience may be ignored
for the moment as it need not disturb the
apprehensions either of people who lead fairly

wholesome lives while incarnated, or of the large
numbers of gallant victims of the War who, on
passing over, find the normal consequences of
minor shortcomings obliterated by the sacrifice
they have made of their earth lives in a nobler
cause. They, and the fairly well behaved
majority, will slip through the third sub-level
without finding themselves entangled in it, and
awake to consciousness on the fourth level of the
astral world, the circumstances of which are
almost infinitely varied but on which, however
varied, happiness is the underlying principle of
all sensation and experience.
Obviously the conditions that make for happiness
will be very different for people who, however
creditable in a humble way their earth lives may
have been, do not represent advanced intellectual
development. The great man of science, for
example, and the simplest maid-servant may share
one characteristic. Both may regard some other
human beings with genuine love. Their happiness
on the fourth level will involve reunion with
such persons if these have passed on first,
ultimate reunion in either case; and if they have
to wait for this there will be partial reunion
meanwhile, for the Egos of people in physical
life are, especially during sleep, in closer
touch with the astral plane than they realize in
the normal waking state. But the highly advanced
Egos, the great men of science and others, have
capacities for the enjoyment of other astral
opportunities over and above those relating to
personal affections. On higher levels of the
astral, to which such capacities would be
automatically the passport, magnificent
opportunities for the expansion of knowledge,
along the lines already laid down in physical
life, would open out. And for such Egos centuries
of glorious intellectual achievement are provided
by the opportunities of the higher astral levels.
They will all come back to incarnation
eventually, for no matter how great they may be,

measured by our present standards they are merely
on the way towards the summit possibilities of
human evolution; but there is no hurry, and as a
matter of fact all the great scientists, poets,
and artists of the last three hundred years or
more are still on the higher levels of the astral
world, even though they may have access to still
higher realms, and may avail themselves of that
privilege from time to time. The higher astral
levels, for intricate reasons, are especially
adapted for the expansion of such knowledge and
capacity as they generally desire.
These lofty levels share some characteristics
with the fourth level but are less earth-like in
their superficial aspect. The conditions of the
lower fourth - for the sub-planes include much
variety - are curiously earth-like. Life there is
free from all the tiresome lower needs we are
troubled with, but people live there in houses,
enjoy beautiful scenery and social intercourse,
although the delightful principles that prevail
there sort them, so to speak, into congenial
groups, besides respecting the individual
attachments of a genuine character passed on from
the love experiences of the earth life. The
progress upward towards sublime spiritual heights
ultimately attainable by all human beings, is a
gradual progress just as the acorn becomes the
oak by degrees, not between to-day and to-morrow.
If anyone is discontented with this explanation
because he thinks of a beloved daughter (for
instance) as turned into an angel of light, the
day after her death, and in touch with the throne
of omniscience, he has failed to appreciate the
magnificence of the scale on which human
perfection is gradually developed. Some of us may
already be exquisite in goodness, as we measure
character, some of us already splendid in
intellectual grandeur, but infinitude is a long
story. Eternity cannot be hustled. The
achievement of the modern occultist has to do
with the illumination of the relatively immediate

future.
And some details of that fascinating period are
already within the range of our comprehension.
Astral matter is plastic to the creative power of
thought. With a vivid imagination here we can
mentally almost visualize objects we might desire
to possess. On the astral plane under similar
conditions, the things desired - appropriate
clothing, for example, pictures, furniture,
houses even - would assume objective reality, and
even durability when many creative thoughts cooperate. But as familiarity with the delightful
freedom from body necessities that the astral
life confers enables people gradually to realize
that they do not need houses, furniture, and so
on, those cease to make their appearance on the
higher levels, where scenes of natural beauty
provide for all the wants of inhabitants
incapable of fatigue, hunger, or thirst,
unconscious of either heat or cold. They may be
fully conscious, none the less, of the
intellectual interests they may have been
concerned with in physical life, and may continue
in touch with the progress of art or discovery
down here, in a way it is hardly possible to
describe in a few words.
This outline sketch of the astral life could,
indeed, be filled in with much further detail and
even be supplemented with some description of
planes or spheres higher and beyond the astral.
But in attempting to explore these, incarnate
human intelligence is up against conditions that
defy the resources of language. For every Ego,
indeed, each experience of astral life must come
to an end sooner or later, though it may extend
to many centuries of our time, and must almost
always culminate in some touch with the lofty
plane beyond; but for the humbler, less developed
entities this touch would hardly involve
consciousness, would merely be the prelude to an
unconscious plunge back into incarnation. The

better understanding of that plunge by the great
many people in the present day who recognize the
necessity of reincarnation as a principle, but
dislike the idea for want of comprehending its
method, is supremely desirable.
The law applies to all, but is so elastic as to
fit in with very different volumes of
circumstance. First we must remember that Egos
ripe for reincarnation represent very different
stages of development. The humblest of these,
leaving out quite savage races that we need not
think about for the moment, is not a very
expanded being when, after a long stay on the
astral, he has shed all memories of his last life
and remains its spiritual nucleus. The Law,
guided by Divine agency, puts that spiritual
nucleus in touch with a new birth, and there is
not much consciousness left on higher planes to
be thought of as the Higher Self of the new
personality. But in the case of the highly
developed entity astral experience, instead of
obliterating unimportant memories, has enormously
expanded those that are important. The Ego as it
stands ready for reincarnation is a being on the
Astral Plane of immense complication, built up by
the experience of many lives in the past, by that
of many intervening astral episodes. He is
probably something much more than can be fully
expressed in its next immersion in physical
matter. He will remain, all through the earth
life to come, the Higher Self of the visible
entity, of which the visible entity in its
physical brain will have but little
consciousness. But, by the hypothesis, enough of
th real complete being will be expressed on the
physical plane to make the new incarnation
greater than ever along the lines of its former
growth. If a great scientist before, a greater
scientist again. If a great poet, a greater, and
so on. But the point to be emphasized for the
moment is that, while the new body is growing,
the actual great intellectual being destined to

use it at maturity is doing little more than
looking on from above. If that idea can once be
properly grasped, it does away with the fear some
people seem to feel, to the effect that they with
their present volume of consciousness will have
to go through babyhood and all the experiences of
the nursery when they come back to earth life.
During all that time they will simply be looking
on from above. To understand fully how it will
come to pass that the baby and the young child
will in a certain sense be conscious also, is
very difficult for most of us, but, however
faintly, that is what has to be realized. There
is so little of the real Ego in the new child up
to seven years of age that, if it dies within
that time, the trace of consciousness it has been
expressing simply reverts to the Higher Self, who
makes another attempt a little later on and
begins to animate a new form, not infrequently in
the same family as the first. The mother's pretty
belief that a later child is her first baby
restored to her is often the outcome of a literal
scientific truth.
If all goes well the first seven years of the new
child's life is spent in the growth of certain
invisible accessories of the body, which medical
science will sooner or later be concerned with
investigating. And, again, the next seven years
are spent in further developments of the same
order, but by the time the boy or girl is
fourteen a good deal of the real entity is
beginning to express itself. Not the whole by any
means, nor even the whole of that designed for
expression in the new life. But now the old
astral is beginning to be wanted no more. In the
new life the Ego is forming for itself a new
astral. The Higher Self remaining in touch with
lofty planes will, for any expresssion it may
need on the astral plane, make use of the new
astral. Of course all these changes fade one into
another like dissolving views. Nature is rarely
addicted to abrupt metamorphoses.

Mutalis mutandis, the process of incarnation as
described above with reference to a welldeveloped Ego is applicable also to people at
intervening stages of growth. The return to
physical life is never attended by inconveniently
premature consciousness in the new body. Or this
broad rule is only in rare cases partially
infringed. Here and there, for example, young
children have been known to show musical talent
at a ridiculously early age. In such cases the
Ego of the great musician in the background is so
eager to express itself on the physical plane
that it cannot wait till the new instrument is
properly tuned for the task. But even Mozarts who
play the piano at six are not all there. Their
condition is so exceptional that it need not be
minutely examined in connection with any sweeping
survey of the laws governing reincarnation.
But one essential principle must never be
forgotten. Guided by supreme wisdom and power,
each new incarnation is conditioned by the merit
or demerit of the Ego returning to physical life.
Students of heredity generally make the mistake
of supposing that ancestral attributes are the
cause of characteristics reproduced in the
descendant. The descendant has been planted in
that family because bodily heredity would there
provide it with a physical vehicle qualified to
give expression to its own inner nature. And,
beyond this, because the circumstances of that
life's programme fit in with the requirements of
absolute justice as regards the claims of the Ego
for happiness or its deserts as regards trouble.
The infinite skill of the Divine Power regulating
the details of each rebirth blends the
intellectual or artistic necessities of the Ego
with a worldly environment appropriate to its
moral condition, its good or bad "Karma," as the
case may be. The working of this law is intensely
interesting and marvellously intricate. The
consequences of good or bad action in one life

partly reflect themselves, to begin the
explanation, in happiness or the reverse during
the astral life. But that is only the first part
of the story. A fundamental law, equivalent, on
higher levels of nature, to the conservation of
energy in mechanics, asserts itself with every
entity coming back to incarnation in the earth
life. Moral action, good or bad, must bear
consequences from life to life. The external
conditions, the happiness or the reverse of each
life are the expression of forces set in activity
during the previous life, or sometimes going back
behind that, during previous lives. And, again,
though they cannot controvert that law,
aspirations in any given life, when sustained and
intense, are an important factor in generating
the environment of the next. To work with the
simplest example, a person in a humble rank in
life may be wishing all the time that he or she
belonged to a superior class. The longing would
have no effect if it were too vague. A carpenter
thinking he would like to be a king does not know
enough about the kingly life to long for it with
precision. But he knows a good deal about the
conditions of social life just a little above his
own. He may or may not long for these, according
to the measure of his contentment in his own
station, but if he does long for them he does so
with precision, with exact comprehension of what
he wants, and then such longing becomes a natural
force tending to colour his next incarnation. And
the principle really operates so widely as to
bring about a gradual upward drift in social
station of the innumerable Egos emerging from the
humble levels of existence. Of course that is
merely a broad rule subject to frequent
exceptions. Sometimes the Karma of a life spent
on high levels may necessitate a plunge to lower,
but normally the aspirations of our life do
contribute to engender the environment of the
next.
Thus in thinking of future Life and Lives we have

to recognize the two-fold character of the
consequence ensuing from the manner in which each
life is spent. That definitely affects both the
immediate future and the ultimate future; more
specifically it colours life on the astral plane
after the death of one body, and determines the
the welfare or suffering of the next incarnation.
For people who have led fairly creditable lives
the astral period is happy and restful, often
associated with opportunities of doing useful
work. Even when the previous life has been faulty
in some respects, it may be that such misdoing
has been of a kind so exclusively identified with
physical life that it can only give rise to
consequences on this plane again in the next
earth life. But when the misdirection of activity
has been of a kind that deeply colours the
surviving consciousness of the Ego, it may
entangle him, when first passing on, in the third
level of the astral world. That is a region of
varied discomfort in which people have to realize
the nature of their misdoing and shed the desires
that have given rise to it. In bad cases that are
not of the supremely bad order, the purification
may be rather a slow process, but assuming that
the character of the person going through it is
tainted merely - not predominately evil - the
ultimate passage to the happy levels already
(very imperfectly) described is assured, not
merely in the long run, but very likely in a
short one.
In awfully serious cases the course of astral
life is very different. There is one variety of
human wickedness that is altogether in a
different category from those that are mere
vices. The sinful character of these - the mere
vices - is often exaggerated; but cruelty, that
worst and horrible form of cruelty which takes
actual pleasure in the infliction of and sight of
pain and suffering in others, is an attribute
that drives the authors of such hideous misdoing
down into that appalling submerged level of the

astral world with which most of those even in
need of purification have nothing whatever to do.
Even that region must be thought of as
purgatorial. Its fearful experiences may at last
cure or begin the cure of the most ghastly
offenders against the Divine Law of love (of
which cruelty is the exact reverse). But
imagination shrinks from the attempt to realize
the details of the sufferings incidental to
existence on the terrible submerged level. Their
duration, in the worst cases, may be counted in
centuries of our time. In others, a brief
experience of this character may give rise to the
needful revulsion of feeling. But though it would
be unwise to attempt a survey of the astral world
without taking cognizance of its lower depths, it
would be worse than unwise to refer to them in
any way that could excite fear on the part of the
harmless, innocent people, too prone, as a
consequence of clumsy religious teaching, to
imagine themselvs "miserable sinners." Talk of
that kind is for the most part silly nonsense,
culminating in something much worse when
associated with ghastly imaginings concerning
eternal sufferings in hell. No decorous language
is equal to the emergency in dealing with the
criminal folly of those who terrify children and
insult God by describing burning tortures to be
inflicted for ever on hapless victims of
Providential atrocities. Nature does provide a
penitential reformatory for souls of diabolical
criminality, but even there reformation is the
purpose in view. It need only be thought of as
completing the broad conception of after-death
conditions that modern research in spiritual
science enables us to form. For the poor innocent
"miserable sinners" of the churches, the view we
are now in a position to obtain of happy life on
the higher levels of the astral world is that
with which they are personally concerned. But
that view even is in need of amplification. The
merely happy restful life to which people of
ordinarily good life may confidently look forward

is not the only possibility that the astral world
holds out. To understand the design of the future
correctly, we must realize first of all that the
whole scheme of evolution provides for a gradual
progress, through many earth lives and many
episodes on higher planes, towards a condition
enormously superior to that yet attained by the
most advanced representatives of current
civilization on earth. By most of the human
family such conditions will ultimately be
attained after periods of time that are
bewildering to the imagination. But when the
distant possibilities of human evolution are
fairly well comprehended in advance, in the light
of such teaching as occult research (and modern
revelation) enables us now to deal with, we see
that it is possible for those who appreciate the
opportunities available to make a much more rapid
progress than is provided for by the natural
drift of events in reference to the multitude.
Some members of the human family have been able
to accomplish this long ages ago, and already
stand on levels of progress on which they become
agents of Divine purpose in promoting the
spiritual growth of mankind. These are referred
to in occult literature as the Masters of Wisdom,
and they are always ready to help forward the
abnormal progress of people who have acquired
some comprehension of their place in Nature, and
are filled with eagerness to get on as rapidly as
possible in the direction of those great heights.
The earth life is the opportunity for beginning
such efforts. In this supremely important aspect
of the subject, as in minor matters, the earth
life is the period for sowing all spiritual seed.
The astral life is the period in which it begins
to bear fruit. A perfectly commonplace earth
life, however harmless and innocent, bears
appropriate fruit in the astral world in the
shape of happiness and rest. An aspiration during
earth life towards real spiritual growth,
coloured by such knowledge as is now available
for all, bears fruit in the shape of personal

touch with those Masters of Wisdom who may guide
the aspirant to incarnations in which he may
accomplish results the dignity and grandeur of
which cannot easily be exaggerated. Something
beyond mere personal happiness is then seen to be
the object of attainment. This world is the
expression of Divine Will: it is governed by
Divine Law, but it is, so to speak, managed in
detail by the agents of Divine Will evolved from
the scheme itself. To become a part of, to be
identified with that sublime agency, is the goal
aimed at by those who fully realize the true
meaning of spiritual growth. That such a
condition involves a species of exalted beatitude
which is something greater than and beyond
personal happiness is a thought that may fairly
be associated with true spiritual aspiration, but
one that does not cover the whole idea, too
subtle perhaps for clear definition in language,
though some trace of it should always colour, for
advanced thinkers, all reference to the changes
inaugurated by each physical death. When the
grave swallows any particular vehicle of
consciousness that we have done with, it
certainly marks an important stage of our
progress through the infinitudes of life, and
represents a very tiresome circumstance connected
with this early period of human evolution; but
only while we are suffering from the sad
imperfections of conventional teaching is the
grave surrounded with terror.
The purpose of this article has not been merely
to dissipate that terror, but to elucidate, for
those who may long since have ceased to feel it,
the detailed circumstances of the passage to the
life beyond; and above all, to show how the allimportant principle of reincarnation does not in
any way conflict with natural aspirations for
spiritual existence after bodily death.
Reincarnation is no hurried process. There is
plenty of time in Eternity. Does anyone imagine
that a thousand years of spiritual life after the

fatigues of this one will not be enough for him?
If he continues hereafter to entertain that view,
then he will have more. Or if he has no such farreaching aspiration, and finds himself content
with the simple enjoyment of the astral life on
its less exalted levels, he will fall asleep and
drift back to physical life in obedience to
natural law at the appropriate time. And both in
his case and in that of his more advanced
contemporaries, the return to physical life will
be accomplished as easily as the processes of
sleep and waking during physical life, with the
inner mechanism of which, for that matter, most
people are no better acquainted than with the
method of rebirth, the fullest acquaintance with
which carries with it the most complete
acquiescence in the wisdom, beauty, and harmony
of the whole design.

RELIGION UNDER REPAIR
ON the 14th of April, 1917, The Times published
an article entitled "Sheep without a Shepherd,"
which, gently and without bitterness but in
equivocal terms, described the conventional
religion of the Churches and all their creeds as
hopelessly out of date. Thinking men and women
were represented as convinced that religion must
be rediscovered from the beginning. The clergyman
and his religion "belong to a dead past."
Thinking people "turn away from the Churches more
and more as their interest in religion grows."
What they need is "a conception of the Universe
in which they may take their place." They believe
in Christianity but they need an expression of it
that will satisfy intelligence. "The time of
cleansing for the Christian theology has been
delayed so long that there is a danger lest the
mass of men should think it all litter and dust
of the past." The Churches have fancied that the
danger would be staved off "by the slow,
reluctant relinquishing of this or that belief as
it became impossible." The real need is for
discovery and growth. The Church "must not be
content any longer to talk pious nonsense in the
hope that it will seem sense because it is
pious."
One might have supposed that so sweeping an
indictment as this, directed against vested
interests firmly rooted in social life, would
have provoked a storm of criticism and a flood of
sympathetic reiteration. Has orthodoxy preferred
silence as on the whole safer than defence that
would provoke fresh attack? If so, the fear is
misdirected, because it is based on a
misunderstanding of the attack. The clergyman
accused of talking pious nonsense thinks the
accuser an atheist denying God. The accuser is
simply indignant with the clergyman for
caricaturing God. There would still be a place
for that clergyman among us if he could be taught

to reverence God wisely. Has that attitude of
wise reverence been attained by any of the
earnest thinkers discontented with the
clergyman's teaching? Has discovery really
anticipated the demand for it set forth in the
article quoted? Are the answers available for
people who "ask real questions about the nature
of the Universe," and may there not be already a
considerable number of others who have profited
during the last thirty years from wide publicity
given to super-physical knowledge at one time
reserved for a peculiarly qualified few?
The true answer to that last question is in the
affirmative, and those who have been concerned
during recent years with the assimilation of
ideas reflected in the Higher Occultism believe
themselves, at all events, in possession of
definite knowledge which meets the intellectual
craving represented by The Times article. Many
books convey this to all who care to read, and
describe the sources from which it is derived.
For some of us who are students of occult science
and philosophy the authors of the teaching given
out are seen to have extraordinary claims on our
trust. The nature of these claims can better be
appreciated after we have fairly considered the
general outline of the teaching they convey. It
constitutes a complete response to the demand set
forth in The Times article. It does give us a
comprehensive view of the Cosmos to which we
belong. It embodies a revelation which is, for
the world at large, a "discovery," of previously
unsuspected truth concerning the fundamental
facts of spiritual silence underlying all forms
of religion. It does much more than this because
it gives us a perfectly clear view of the course
of human evolution, dissipating all the darkness
that surrounds death; lighting up the conditions
of the new life that immediately follows the
change and pointing out the path to be ultimately
trodden, leading to infinitudes of progress. The
view of Divinity, Life and Nature thus afforded -

conveniently to be described as the Higher
Occultism - makes its first claim on respectful
consideration by its own inherent reasonableness.
It is vast in its scope, widely ramifying in all
directions, but perfectly coherent,
scientifically harmonious; all parts of the whole
mutually supporting each other. In one way, that
is a difficulty for the beginner approaching the
study of the Higher Occultism. The comprehension
of - not necessarily the whole because the whole
is an infinitude - but of a great volume of
super-physical knowledge is essential to an
adequate appreciation of its parts separately.
But eventually when enough is grasped, conviction
sets in as an intellectual necessity, and then,
among other conclusions, the honest student
realizes that the Higher Occultism has been a
gift to the world from Teachers who are obviously
entitled to profound trust. But his perception of
this is no longer needed as a guarantee of the
teaching. It embodies its own confirmation.
Perhaps this can only be fully appreciated after
a more exhaustive study of super-physical science
than can be provided for within the limits of a
Review article; but a mere outline sketch of the
knowledge accumulating on our hands will go far
towards justifying the claim made above. Indeed,
the most elaborate attempt to deal with detail
would still leave us gazing at remote horizons
beyond which human vision cannot penetrate, but
that is by itself a condition which tends to
fortify belief in what can be seen. No theory
which invested Eternity with a beginning and an
end could be otherwise than absurd. But while the
idea of God, Divinity, the Divine principle whatever phrase we prefer - expands into regions
beyond the reach of understanding, we do find
that in so far as this world is concerned - in so
far, indeed, as the Solar System is concerned Occultism presents us with an intelligible
conception of the Divine Hierarchy; also, as
already affirmed, clearly illuminating the

mysteries of human origin and destiny, the course
and conditions of evolution, and the manner in
which Divine justice can be reconciled with the
terrible irregularities of life in the physical
world. It puts us in a position of intimate
familiarity with the life on super-physical
worlds surrounding our globe to which all pass
after the change described as death. It enlarges
our view of human destiny, to that extent that we
see life on other planets linked with that of the
Earth; and the whole Solar System resolves itself
into a definite Divine enterprise, with an origin
and purpose vaguely appreciable, though in touch
with mysteries of infinitude and eternity which
we need not, at this stage of our progress,
attempt to fathom. Incidentally occult science
forecasts the future progress in various
directions of physical science, and in some cases
those forecasts, made ten or fifteen years ago,
have already been overtaken by practical
research. The proof of that last statement would
involve a long digression, but is definitely
available, as many of the conclusions arising
from the discovery of radium were clearly set
forth in a book entitled Occult Chemistry
published many years before Madame Curie's
luminous contribution to plain physical science.
Indeed laboratory research has as yet only partly
overtaken the occult discoveries though
confirming them as far as it has gone.
The claims for occult science just set forth may
be examined one by one. It does not shrink from
the use of the word "God" except in so far as the
word has been degraded by ignoble creeds. But
Supreme Divinity is necessarily infinite and must
have reference to manifestations in millions of
worlds besides our own. And yet we feel sure that
Divine Consciousness permeates this world. Occult
teaching assures us that our own individual
consciousness is a Divine emanation, though
limited in its scope and range of power by the
vehicle or sheath in which it is working - for

the moment. The idea is susceptible of expansion.
All consciousness is a Divine emanation - that
working in animal forms - in vegetable forms even
- also that working in super-human forms on
planes or realms of Nature loftier that the
physical. The idea at once leads to an
appreciation of the sublime magnificence of the
Divine Hierarchy intervening between our humanity
and the nearest manifestation of the infinite
Divinity. Reasonable occultists do not presume to
formulate a rigid conception of that nearest
manifestation, but they know that the Solar
System is a definite enterprise within the
manifested Universe and therefore that in some
way it can be identified with a vortex, so to
speak, in infinite Divinity, and that is
generally referred to as the Logos of the Solar
System. Words are not well adapted to such
thoughts, but we must be content to use the best
we have got. The simple Christian who wants to
discern a Father in God may be chilled by this
awfully super-physical idea, but he need not be
so if he clings to his faith in Christ which the
occultist has no wish to disturb. Medieval creeds
which the Churches perpetuate have caricatured
the Christ idea, among others, but the occultist
clearly understands Christ as belonging to the
Divine Hierarchy, in close touch with this world,
and that understanding carries with it a
reverential feeling that no conventional
Christian can possibly improve upon. Of course
the Hierarchy of Beings representing various
stages of spiritual evolution and a vast variety
of functions in Nature include sublime entities
on all imaginable levels, but the fundamental
all-important idea to be held firmly in thinking
of the hierarchy is that it constitutes the
Agency through which the Divine purpose is worked
out in manifestation. This is one way in which a
scientific complexion is put upon occult
religion. Agency runs down to the minutest
activities of Nature. There is no break in the
uniformity of the method. Archangelic Beings

fulfil the Divine purpose on their levels.
Elemental beings on levels of consciousness below
our comprehension are agents in promoting the
growth of plants, or carrying out the laws (the
Divine purposes) of chemical affinity. This last
thought related to a huge branch of occult
science in a borderland that physical research
must soon invade.
A hierarchy that includes Beings of the
Archangelic order (and also of still loftier
spiritual rank) together with humbler agencies
below the level of humanity, concerned with the
working of natural law, must obviously also
include beings but relatively little above the
human level. And this thought illuminated by
definite information brings the occultist into
touch with a realm of knowledge bearing equally
on the government of this world and the
possibilities of human evolution. There is a
level of the great hierarchy definitely recruited
from humanity. Common conceptions of human
evolution have correctly hit off the idea that it
is recruited itself from lower forms of life.
Prevailing belief, however, has not grasped the
notion that it expands into higher forms without
any break of continuity. At an earlier period in
the world's history this was more generally
appreciated than it has been in recent years. In
ancient Egypt, for example - though the five or
six thousand years beyond which modern research
does not extend were a mere decadent reminder as
compared with still earlier Egyptian
civilizations - the people generally knew that
some few hierophants had risen to a high
condition of knowledge and power as compared with
ordinary humanity. Definite systems of initiation
were known to lead upward towards those heights.
Though later generations have lost sight of this
deeply significant truth, it is still as true as
ever. The (relatively) lower levels of the Divine
Hierarchy are still recruited in that way. For
recent ages the system has been veiled from

common observation. The progress of humanity is
worked out in accordance with a definite Divine
plan. For a time it was necessary that
intelligence should be trained in the study of
physical nature. The improvement of brain
capacity was the task before the incarnate
vanguard of humanity. Super-physical knowledge,
the fascination of which would have attracted the
pioneers of brain culture off the path designed
for them, was hidden away for a time. Those men
of science who resent the movements of thought
bringing it to the light of day again are
survivals of the regime to which they have not
yet ceased to belong - unconsciously bringing
testimony, amusing to the occultist, to the
accuracy of his diagnosis.
The principle just hinted at - that human
evolution does not stop short at the stage
reached by the most brilliant representatives of
current civilization - leads on to the
appreciation of the idea that infinitude is
applicable to that evolution, as to the loftier
conception of Divine nature. The idea is best
understood by tracing it back to some extent into
the past. Consciousness - which eludes research
in the dissecting room - is, in a certain sense,
uniform in its nature; incomprehensible as
regards its essence, but vaguely acceptable as
somehow of Divine origin. As above pointed out,
its scope and range are determined by the vehicle
or sheath in which it is involved. The full
development of that idea puts a new face upon the
whole theory of evolution. In any animal form we
like to think of, consciousness has obviously a
very limited scope compared with our own. The
splendid light Darwin threw on Nature showed us
the growth of form, following certain physical
plane impulses. The occultist at first only found
fault with the theory as ignoring the
simultaneous evolution of consciousness. A
clearer view has since been obtained. In the
lower animal forms consciousness has not been

individualized. But an aggregate volume of
consciousness animating many lower forms
gradually feels the need of animating higher
ones. Fully developed, the description of the
process would be very protracted. Eventually in
the highest animal forms consciousness is
individualized and passes under well-understood
conditions into the human form, not at once into
one of high development. By this time, however,
the individualized consciousness may be treated
as an Ego subject to the law of reincarnation. At
first its progress may be thought of as the
growth of the Ego - its spiritual growth going on
concurrently with the improvement in the human
form and the perfection of the brain. But how is
this view to be reconciled with the theory that
consciousness is identical in essence throughout
Nature? Quite easily, for all who profit by what
is known concerning the laws governing
reincarnation. Desire is one of them. Desire for
an improved form providing improved scope for
consciousness would be distinctly operative. But
the man at a humble level does not know enough to
formulate such a desire explicitly. He does it
automatically by making the best use of the form
- or vehicle - he has got. Natural law then gives
him a better one in his next life and so on ad
infinitum.
The principle properly understood accounts for
lofty as well as humble progress in evolution.
The man in the beginning does not know what he
wants, but gets it by unconsciously conforming to
the law. On a higher level he obeys it
consciously, and the result is the same. On all
levels, of course short of those that are very
exalted, action good or bad - Karma, to use the
technical expression, good or bad - hastens or
retards the result, and a mere recognition of the
laws concerning reincarnation and Karma goes far
to explain and justify the conditions of the
world as we find it - with all its ghastly
irregularities of physical and moral welfare.

That is a huge branch of occult study by itself.
but in tracing the manner in which humanity is
linked with the Divine Hierarchy the occult
interpretation of the minor mysteries of current
life on Earth may be left aside for the moment.
A profoundly significant phrase, borrowed, I
believe, from some Oriental scripture, runs as
follows: "Whatever is, is, has been, or will be
Human." Those few words cover the whole sweep of
thought concerning the origin and destinies of
Man, the meaning of creation, the essence of all
religion. Such thought, of course, melts into the
incomprehensible if pushed backward or forward
into the infinitudes of Eternity, but is
magnificently full of suggestion. That it
accounts for all lower forms of life and the
earlier conditions of this world is relatively
uninteresting. It accounts for the Divine
Hierarchy. That upward growth that we can trace
from lower to higher forms of human life is
nowhere arrested. Occult science has shown us
from the first that living forms are not built
merely of physical matter. During this familiar
earth-life, even fairly advanced representatives
of humanity are capable of passing from time to
time into vehicles of consciousness built of
finer orders of matter than those which build up
flesh and blood. The full development of that
subject would claim a long dissertation, but for
the moment the important point is that, though
physical humanity is an essential phase through
which differentiated consciousness passes, a time
comes when physical form is needed no more, and
progress goes on without any break in the process
towards conditions of being that, contemplated in
imagination from the physical plane level, seem
to represent different orders of creation. Beings
on that level are simply among the members of the
Divine Hierarchy referred to by the words "has
been" in the phrase quoted above.
But that does not mean that they have been simply

human at any period in the history of this
planet. From the point of view of occult science
no world is a complete undertaking in itself.
Life, the infusion of Divine consciousness into
matter, is a vast coherent phenomenon in Nature,
limitless in all directions. The idea may be
approached by considering its bearing on the
Solar System, itself, as we are enabled now to
realize, a coherent scheme of manifestation, all
its parts inter-related one with another, and as
a whole inter-related with a larger Cosmos.
Common astronomy deals with the magnitudes,
distances, and movements of the various planets
constituting the Solar System, and to some extent
with their relative stages of development.
Jupiter, for example, is obviously a world in an
early stage of its growth, because it is still
hot - almost incandescent. Occult astronomy which might be called Vital Astronomy - deals
with the life going on in each planet, or for
which each is the preparation. In most cases each
planet is part of an (apparently) independent
scheme of evolution. Thus the planet Venus
belongs to a senior scheme as compared with that
which the Earth represents. Human life there has
already been carried to stages of growth
enormously in advance of the stage yet reached
here. But there, as here, individual growth has
been affected by the play of individual Free Will
(which presents no mystery to the occultist),
and, though a very large majority of the original
human population of the Venus scheme have
attained to highly exalted conditions, some have
dropped off in the course of bygone ages, the
Egos having failed to attain conditions
qualifying them to reincarnate among the more
advanced majority. Their destiny is intensely
interesting, as illuminating to the economy of
the Solar System as a whole. There is no final
perdition for the failures of each planetary
scheme in turn. They pass on to the next scheme!
The failures of the Senior Venus scheme are

merged in the humanity of the Earth scheme. The
further details of this process are of increasing
interest. The failures concerned, though left
behind by the successful candidates for progress
on Venus, fell off from their proper human family
at a later stage than that generally reached so
far by the foremost races, even, of the Earth
scheme. So the present conditions of Earth
humanity do not yet afford them appropriate
incarnation. Nature deals with the difficulty in
her usual competent fashion, but to make the
solution intelligible the conditions of our own
planetary scheme must be taken into account. In
our case three planets are linked together in one
comprehensive evolution. Of course, the reason of
this is intelligible, but that would be a long
story by itself and may be left aside for the
moment. Our human family is at present
distributed over three worlds - Mars, the Earth,
and Mercury. Silly criticism based on ignorance
may fall foul of this statement on the ground
that Mercury - so near the Sun - must be too hot
for human life. Too hot certainly for bodies of
our flesh and blood, but the chemistry of Nature
can solve more intricate problems than those
merely of temperature. Mercury bodies are adapted
to temperatures in which our own could not exist.
Now the main body of our human family is here on
Earth, but an inferior remnant at a very low and
coarse stage of development - the dregs of our
humanity, so to speak - is still on Mars. A
vanguard of peculiarly advanced Egos is already
on Mercury, leading a more beautiful life than
any of which the Earth's main body has yet had
experience. That advanced vanguard supplies the
Venus failures with suitable opportunities for
incarnation, and the bulk of the Mercury
population at the present time had to begin with
a Venus origin. Of course, the numbers are not
great compared with those of the Earth - taking
those to include Egos in and out of incarnation in physical bodies, that is to say, and on the

higher spheres surrounding the physical planet.
The importance of the explanation just given
turns on the way it shows the whole Solar System
as a coherent organism, for obviously the system
now operative as between the senior evolution of
Venus and the next in order - our own - will go
on providing for the evolution, at remote periods
in the future, of the outer planets, Jupiter,
Saturn, Uranus and Neptune. Circumstances will no
doubt vary in these far-off regions of the
stupendous Divine programme, but the leading idea
establishes the unity within diversity of the
plan that the Solar System represents.
This light through comprehensive sketch of the
Divine plan will enable the reader incidentally
to understand how the students of occult or Vital
Astronomy obtain their information, obviously of
a kind that no commonplace physical faculties can
possibly deal with. We see human evolutions
extending upward, without any break of
continuity, to the nearest levels of the Divine
Hierarchy. We realize the unbroken continuity of
consciousness beyond those levels, so that
knowledge of the kind that seems at the first
glance to belong to Divinity itself must filter
down to the lower levels of the Divine Hierarchy.
Then we begin to understand how the Beings on
those levels - in touch in one direction with
relatively Infinite Wisdom, in the other with
ordinary humanity - may see fit to pass on to
some qualified pupils in ordinary humanity some
information illuminating the world and the Cosmos
to which that ordinary humanity belongs. Indeed,
it is obvious that sooner or later such
information must be passed on, to provide for the
fulfilment of the Divine Plan. At earlier stages
of growth humanity was not in need of all this
lofty teaching. It had to accomplish certain
achievements - now, from the higher point of
view, essential preliminary undertakings.
Humanity had to learn simple broad principles of

moral science, to grapple with the vague idea
that there was some Divine mystery pervading the
world. The religions of various periods met this
need with more or less success. It did not much
matter at first that they were irrational in
their design. In days of one early papacy, for
example, when priests disputed as to whether
Christ was the real son, or an adopted son, of
God, religious intelligence was not ripe for more
suitable discussion concerning the Divine
Hierarchy. The writer of the article on "Sheep
without a Shepherd" seems to think the Clergy of
the present day are not much more ready for it.
However this may be, some of them must be ready,
and outside the Church a sufficient number have
been found ready, to justify the full blow of the
teaching which this paper partly embodies. Then,
again, for the last thousand years or so,
humanity has been getting ready for higher
teaching by perfecting its thinking capacity. The
study of physical science has polished human
brains to a high degree of delicacy. That had to
be done before religion could be levelled up.
Habits of scientific thinking have certainly
paved the way for appreciating the credibility of
occult teaching, better than the mental training
of the theologian plodding in the path of
medieval creeds. A considerable number of people
thus prepared are ripe for superior enlightenment
- more than ripe: definitely craving for it. It
has become incumbent on the custodians of the
superior knowledge to give out that knowledge far
more freely than was necessary or desirable in
the past. Only as we become possessed of the
knowledge can we appreciate the obligation. The
further growth of humanity towards higher
conditions of being can only be accomplished by a
humanity comprehending its purpose and potential
destinies. That level of the Divine Hierarchy
nearest to and immediately above ordinary
humanity has to watch over, guide, and promote
the spiritual growth of that ordinary humanity.
As those ready for new conditions become more and

more numerous, the work of those who link
humanity with the hierarchy becomes more and more
important and exacting. The occult student
generally refers to those who are the links in
question as the Masters of Wisdom. The title will
serve for the moment, though we may eventually
adopt a better. Whatever name we use, they are
the immediate agents of Divinity in carrying out
the design in which this world and its
inhabitants play a part, and, as time goes on,
and they have more and more to do in a world
ripening by degrees, their numbers must be
recruited. That can only be done as the more
advanced claimants for spiritual enlightenment
are mentally and morally cultivated. The
evolution of a humanity, in fact, is analogous to
that of a single entity. In childhood his growth,
well-being and education depend on others.
Teaching gradually enables him to realize that
his own will and effort must be brought into play
to accomplish growth beyond a certain stage. His
later development must depend on himself. So with
humanity at large. The evolutionary law works
under loftier guidance for a time; but the race
cannot improve beyond a certain stage without
understanding its place in Nature, without
realizing the sublime truth that it must for its
later development guide its own evolution, govern
itself.
We are now at an important turning-point in the
World's history, even as the situation might be
considered without reference to the enormously
significant fact that the super-physical Powers
of Good and Evil are engaged in the fiercest
struggle for supremacy that has ever been waged
in the whole history of the Solar System. The
issue of that struggle is not in doubt. Beyond
the horrors of the final crisis there stretches
the assured vision of a beautiful future, but its
beauty will be partly due to the continual
expansion of the knowledge which has been
gradually pouring into our hands during the last

thirty-odd years, the ever-growing appreciation
of which is no less certain than the ultimate
defeat of the Satanic power hitherto directed,
among other purposes, to stifle and impede its
dissemination. That defeat accomplished, the
World's progress along desirable paths will
proceed with a rapidity for which no previous
experience has prepared us, and the influence of
that comprehensive view of Nature and Divine
truth that has hitherto been "occult" - veiled or
partially obscured - will permeate religious
thinking and soon lead to a reconstruction even
of the orthodox clerical presentation thereof, so
that there will no longer be any inclination to
regard that as "litter and dust of the past." The
unseen laws governing the world and human
evolution, the conscious agencies through which
they are administered, the higher realms of life
intimately associated with the physical life on
the Earth's surface, will all come within the
range of human understanding in a near future and
will bring about such a blend between science and
religion, that each will be regarded as the
complement of the other - the piety of the Church
no longer nonsense in the sight of Science, and
the critical insight of Science no longer a
terror for a Church which will lean on it for
support.

RELIGION UNDER REPAIR: A REPLY TO
PROFESSOR LINDSAY
ENDEAVOURING to frame a crushing "rejoinder" to
my attempt to show that conventional religion is
badly in need of repair, Professor Lindsay,
writing in the Nineteenth Century, provided his
readers with so fair a summary of its contents
that he is entitled to my thanks for bringing
these afresh to the notice of any among them who
may have overlooked their first presentation. But
in failing to appreciate their importance he
shows clearly how minds untrained in the study of
Nature's super-physical mysteries are embarrassed
with prepossessions partly derived from medieval
theology and partly from materialistic habits of
thought prevalent in the last century. Current
thinking meanwhile has been deeply coloured by
the recognition of some capacities of human
consciousness that transcend the physical senses.
There are still many amongst us who resent subtle
discoveries outrunning their own experience. What
they can't understand they refuse to believe, and
must be left in the rear of mental progress. But
for those who do not protect their opinions by
carefully guarding their ignorance, some broad
convictions, at all events, are gathering
strength.
Foremost among these is the certainty that there
are avenues to perception over and above those
provided by the physical senses. If anyone now
denies the possibility of clairvoyance, he does
not express an opinion; he merely shows himself
unacquainted with certain developments of
scientific research. Again, while crowds of
blatant assailants abuse the multitudes who know
that they have touch with conditions of human
life following on the change called death,
disbelief in that matter where it exists is
merely due to ignorance of the work done in that
department of research. Those who challenge
either of the statements just made are not

entitled to attack a writer who takes them for
granted. The literature dealing with them is
abundant. No one addressing intelligent hearers
concerning any fresh development of superphysical research can be fairly called on to
waste his time in going afresh over the
rudimentary discoveries of fifty years ago. A
modern chemist, writing about the atomic weight
of thorium-lead, does not include in his essay an
elaborate argument to show that the measurement
of atomic weight is possible.
The stream of criticism Professor Lindsay directs
against my exposition of lately expanded teaching
concerning human and super-human evolution may be
partly summed up in the question "How do you
know?" expressed in various phrases, few of which
offend good taste in their form. But the answer
is embodied in the various books I have written
in the last thirty-odd years, and I do not want
to go over all that ground again. I will
summarize it briefly, recognizing this as by far
the most important question that can be put by
anyone meeting with the later results of occult
research before having grown familiar with the
earlier achievements of that great undertaking.
But in the first instance I am tempted to deal
with some amusing objections levelled by the
Professor against various "assumptions" I have
ventured to put forward as in no need of
elaborate proof.
My remark that occult research anticipated many
of the "conclusions arising from the discovery of
radium" is twisted into a statement that it
anticipated the discovery of radium, and treated
with sarcasm accordingly. The fact, as I stated
it, is simply indisputable to anyone who will
take the trouble to read the book I referred to,
Occult Chemistry, and observe the date of its
publication. It is obviously impossible to repeat
the contents of that book here. It will be found
deeply significant for all persons interested in

chemical science.
Pantheism! There is some resemblance between the
true doctrine and the speculation going by that
name, just as there is some resemblance between
metempsychosis and reincarnation, but also all
the difference that there is between a lump of
gold-bearing quartz and a finished gold coin.
Spinoza's pantheism absorbed God in Nature and
left no God behind. Occult pantheism recognizes
Nature as an emanation of God, but also
recognizes the infinite, supreme, Divine
incomprehensible Being of omnipotent
consciousness which is God, as losing nothing by
its infusion in matter. Thus occult pantheism
includes Deism while clearing that conception of
its limitations. It is true that almost all the
finished mental products of modern occult
research have been crudely anticipated in a great
many early philosophies and scriptures. The
splendour of their modern presentation is due to
the extraction of the interior truth from the
rough ore - its re-statement in terms of Western
scientific thinking. That is the answer to the
objection that my "theory is as old as
Gnosticism," and to the somewhat inane charge
that "my pretensions to unfold a new and
satisfying cosmic world-view are simply
ridiculous." That which is ridiculous is the
suggestion that in its present form - with modern
scientific precision and detail - it can be found
either in Gnostic writings, or even in Sanscrit
Upanishads - with which by the way our Professor
may not be intimately acquainted as he refers
vaguely to "Hindoo philosophy." That phrase might
be paralleled by a Hindoo who should refer to
"the European language" as though there were only
one. It may be in a certain sense true that
"there is nothing new under the Sun," but as time
goes on old ideas get sometimes so embellished by
advancing knowledge that they seem the product of
a new revelation. That is emphatically true of
the cosmology developed now by students of what -

for want of any better term - I have called the
Higher Occultism.
Reincarnation! Our Professor thinks it "has never
found favour in the West." I think it is
commanding the assent of all intelligent people whenever it is understood. Unhappily it is very
widely misunderstood - as by our Professor,
obviously, when he describes it as a paralyzing
doctrine of which fatalism is the natural
outcome. The natural outcome is exactly the
reverse, because it shows each life in turn the
expression of causes set in motion by the freewill of the Ego in former lives. Again, complete
explanation of the real doctrine would claim very
many of these pages. That doctrine is fairly set
forth in my own published writings, but I do not
feel entitled to advertise them here. If anyone
thinks, along necessitarian lines, that acts in
each life are inevitable, and therefore, as
causes, encouraging fatalism, the answer is,
firstly, a contradiction of the assumption
arising from our knowledge of the way Karma is
adjusted by the Elemental agents of the Lipika! I
use technical phraseology for the moment, to hint
that in dealing with the Higher Occultism I am
skirting the confines of an elaborate science.
The words used above will have a definite meaning
for every Theosophical student, and will, I
venture to think, be quite destitute of meaning
for the Professor. Secondly, the reason why
incarnation provides for intellectual moral and
spiritual growth and expansion is to be discerned
in the fact, so ill-understood by the
materialistic science of the last century, that
Thought is a force. Again, that is a statement
that people ignorant of all that has been done in
psychic research during the last quarter of the
last century will not understand, and, therefore,
will foolishly deny. The influence of thought on
future incarnations has been elaborately traced
in my own and other current books. In truth it
determines their course. And, when understood,

reincarnation becomes not only acceptable but the
only thinkable method of carrying on human
evolution. Some people are frightened of it,
because they foolishly imagine that it means
their own individuality and consciousness
immersed in a baby form, and miserable in such a
condition. Their consciousness during the baby
period will be on a higher plane in another
vehicle. They will not enter their new bodies
till these are mature far beyond the stage of the
nursery. How can I convey a glimmer of the truth
in a few words? The spiritual entity of an
advanced representative of a highly civilized
race may be older than this world. His or her
incarnate personality, in any given case, may be
only a partial incarnation. There is a Higher
Self, the part of the whole self, on a spiritual
plane all the while. Clairvoyants, adequately
endowed, can see the law at work. Mesmeric
practice will often enable one to get touch
through a personality with his or her Higher
Self, and thus not merely verify its existence
but acquire voluminous information concerning the
conditions of the super-physical realms of
consciousness belonging to this world. These
become so familiar to the qualified occult
investigator, that current discussions as to
whether they do really exist or not are more
ludicrous in his sight than the outsider who
never concerns himself with such inquiries can
easily imagine. And students of occultism will be
even more amused by the Professor's criticism to
the effect that their studies throw "no light on
the problems of life and consciousness." Their
literature is saturated with ethical teaching of
an exalted order, which bears on every imaginable
problem of life and consciousness. Some
Theosophical writers, indeed, are so dominated by
the thought that nothing matters except the
cultivation of the loftiest moral virtues, that
they are less interested in the knowledge
concerning the previously hidden mysteries of
Nature which it has been my special business to

unveil as far as possible. To say that the Higher
Occultism, which embraces or includes Theosophy,
does not concern itself with moral problems,
would be like saying that the branch of science
called Physics does not concern itself with
electrical phenomena.
So now let me turn to the supremely important
question Professor Lindsay puts impressively with reference to a statement I made about Venus
and Mercury - "How does he know?" Quite
unconsciously he answers his own question when,
intending to be satirical, he says: "Mr. Sinnett
would appear to have sources of information not
generally available." Precisely so. I first came
into touch with those sources of information in
the year 1879, and a year or two later wrote a
book, The Occult World, fully detailing the
circumstances under which I obtained that touch,
and some of the intellectual results that ensued
from it. That touch has been maintained to the
present day, and it is hugely important that the
consequent authenticity of Theosophical and
Occult teaching should be properly appreciated.
Explanation of the reasons which led many of us
to trust them in the beginning, and of
experiences confirming that trust in later years,
is thus due not so much to any casual critic
exhibiting hostile incredulity, as to the everincreasing multitudes who are sympathetically
attracted to occult teaching on its own inherent
merits. Already the Theosophical Society, which
does not by any means exhaustively comprehend the
vast movement of Theosophical thought, numbers according to last year's general report - 989
distinct branches or "Lodges" all over the world,
with 26,280 members, leaving "enemy countries"
out of account. In the interest of these - now
constituting the second generation of
theosophical members, for I am almost the only
survivor of quite the first generation - as well
as in the interest of the far larger numbers who
will assuredly appreciate Theosophical teaching

as time goes on, it is supremely desirable that
the actuality and nature of that "Occult World"
described (very imperfectly) in my first book
should be correctly realized. All knowledge on
which our welfare depends must be constantly
brought up to date. A conviction once definitely
and justly established in the mind ought never to
fade, but for many people such convictions
require to be refreshed from time to time. So, in
reply to an inquiry, which on its own merits
alone need not perhaps have claimed very earnest
treatment, but may have a dull, wide echo if
undealt with, I shall venture to explain once
more "how I know" and what are my sources of
information.
The great developments, as far as they concerned
myself, began in 1879, and, though the Professor
thinks that Mme. Blavatsky and the Mahatmas are a
little démodé, the events of that period paved
the way for supremely important results. As
anyone who will read my first book will see, Mme.
Blavatsky exercised abnormal powers. It is futile
to suggest that later on she was accused of
practising imposture. These accusations related
to events occurring long after I left India. They
are scorned by the multitudes who still reverence
her memory, but it is not my business to deal
with them. The record of her magical doings which
I put forward has never been challenged. Nor can
it be challenged except on the hypothesis that I
am not telling the truth. If things occurred
under the circumstances I describe, no possible
theory can be framed to account for them except
the theory that she exercised power over forces
of nature as yet unknown to science, producing
effects that were a defiance of conventional
beliefs relating to the natural laws governing
matter. No critics of my story accuse me of
intentional falsehood. They would be laughed at
by the large number who know me of they did. They
may accuse me of having been deceived, but that
accusation falls to the ground for all who read

my records, because, if things happened as I
describe them, there was no room for deception.
That position could only be established afresh by
a tedious recapitualtion of definite occurrences,
and it is useless for critics to assail it unless
they will refer to the original statements and
show how, under the circumstances, there was room
for imposture. For the moment I must be content
to repeat that such showing is impossible. I was
far more deeply interested at the time than
anyone can be now, in eliminating from the
experiments I made all possibility of fraud.
Anyhow the result was that I came to know that
Mme. Blavatsky exercised, or was the agent
through whom were exercised, super-normal powers.
That made me inclined to listen to her statement
as to how such powers were obtained. The
statement was to the effect that they were a
relatively feeble reflection of mightier powers
and wider knowledge possessed by certain men whom
she had personally known - members of a great
Brotherhood representing a higher stage of human
evolution than had been attained by the foremost
even of those representing the progress of
scientific knowledge in the open world at large.
This statement, though striking and impressive,
did not seem to me incredible. Why should human
perfectibility after crossing such gulfs as those
which separate our greatest exponents of
intellectual evolution - Faraday, Newton,
Copernicus, Pythagoras, etc., etc. - from the man
in the street (not to speak of the savage), why
should it stop short at the stage represented by
the names quoted? Nor was any mental difficulty
involved in the idea that still loftier stages
had to do with knowledge - and powers ensuing
from it - that could not desirably be diffused
through the world at large in its present stage
of development. That is obvious, and it accounted
for the reserve and seclusion of the advanced
"Masters of Wisdom," or, to use the favourite

Eastern term, "the Mahatmas." When I began to
write about them, shallow-minded readers fastened
on a story which lent itself to derision, while
more intelligent listeners in large numbers began
to think seriously of "Theosophy," the
comprehensive term assigned to the new views of
natural philosophy opening out before us.
Satisfied myself (to go back to the beginning)
that the exponents of the higher knowledge must
exist, I was eager to get into touch with them and succeeded. First a protracted correspondence
began. How did letters pass between myself and
unknown correspondents, in Himalayian seclusion?
But that time I knew (see The Occult World) that
occult power could transport physical objects
through space. I found that the "Master" could
"take" my letters by means unfamiliar to the
post, could give me the answers in strange and
unexpected ways. But the "wonder" of this grew
gradually subordinate to the importance of the
communications themselves. Moreover, it was
eclipsed by personal experiences of a supernormal character that put me in closer touch with
the Occult World than that established by the
correspondence. I am now merely sketching the
course of events. To describe them in detail
would mean re-writing some of my books, but the
sketch will, at any rate, suggest the nature of
those "sources of information" which are within
my reach, though "not generally available." And a
moment's reflection will show how reasonable it
is to believe that the "Masters" (to use the
Western equivalent for the Indian word Mahatma)
are able, if willing, to give such information
concerning the other planets of the Solar System
and its general design as that which I made use
of in my former article¹ for the Nineteenth
Century, and in many books. Common knowledge here
amongst us relating to the capacities of our own
clairvoyants (though there are people claiming to
be cultured who remain absolutely ignorant of
them) shows us the way in which senses finer than

the familiar five will reveal what is going on at
great physical distances. Developed by Masters of
super-physical science is it surprising that they
should reach out to other worlds of our system?
_____________
¹ See Nineteenth Century and After, September 1917, pp.
536, 537.

Again, amongst us everyone following the progress
of modern psychic research will know that it is
possible for the consciousness (Soul, Ego, call
it what you like) to pass out of the physical
body for a time during life, to bid a conscious
good-bye to the physical body left asleep, and
roam the spaces of the "astral" world immediately
around us, bringing back recollection of such
excursions when resuming the use of the physical
body. And during such excursions it may be
possible, for those permitted, to have speech
with Masters, as well as with lesser human
entities who have gone through the change called
death, and thus learn lessons of priceless
interest.
There are indeed other ways of gathering in such
teaching, and these have been to some extent at
my service since the far-away days of the
beginning that I have been describing, up to the
present time. I am now in a position to deal,
much more definitely than then, with the
functions of the Masters in connection with the
government of the world and of the stupendous
Divine Hierarchy to which they belong.
Vast numbers among us are ripe now to appreciate
this revelation, though other vast numbers are
still intellectually cramped by conventional
prejudice from which they cannot escape, and it
is to those thus ripe that I venture to address
what remains to be said, rather than to
assailants impatient with the disturbance of
their cherished limitations.

The condition described as Mastership can only be
attained by the sanction of still higher
authority, when the moral and spiritual evolution
of the being in question has reached a condition
which I have described in an earlier writing as
follows:
When he is in a position to survey the whole process on
which the human family is launched, from its beginning in
the remote past to its conclusion in the almost
immeasurably distant future; when all the natural laws
and forces which play around it lie within his
comprehension and grasp, whether they are operative on
the physical plane with its wonderful complexity of
molecules and forces, or on those other planes invisible
to ordinary sight which interpenetrate it or surround it
and are more bewildering in their complexity still; when
all the myriad enigmas of good and evil, of sin and
sorrow, and hope, are resolved into intelligible meaning,
and neither the earth below, nor the heavens above, nor
life, nor death, hold any riddles from his understanding,
the Adept is qualified to attain the final rank in the
vast concatenation of progress we have been surveying.

Concurrently with the advance in knowledge and
power thus suggested, the Master has been
correctly described by another writer as
necessarily endowed with "perfect compassion, an
absolutely selfless devotion to the welfare of
all sentient beings, and a boundless love and
fellow-feeling for them all." It has been my
privilige in recent years to pick up some bits of
information concerning former lives of some among
the great Masters, and these have illustrated
what the writer just quoted meant by absolute
selflessness, in a way that has thrilled me with
emotion, though on a higher level self-sacrifice
is taken as a matter of course. How, it may be
asked, can a being on the Master's level be in a
position to incur self-sacrifice? If his body is
menaced by injury or destruction, he can quit it
at will and assume a new incarnation if he
chooses. Undoubtedly; but though he may have been

doing that at intervals (very protracted
intervals) for a long series of ages, he may
sometimes as a definite duty, to fulfil some
peculiar purpose, take quite a humbler or
commonplace incarnation in the ordinary world. He
will never in such cases be known as a Master in
the ordinary world, but he may, for reasons
connected with the welfare of other people,
choose to remain with them and die, even a
painful death in the ordinary way, though he
might had he chosen have slipped out of the body
without incurring the least inconvenience, or, as
Apollonius of Tyana is said to have done when
before Domitian, vanish from sight and remove
himself from danger by occult means. Nor indeed
does the mere exchange of one body for another
mean any trouble for the Adept of Master rank. He
can keep any one going for periods measured in
centuries that dazzle our imagination, but in the
course of ages may find it convenient to take new
ones from time to time. And this thought alone is
one which will help to dissipate the erroneous
notion prevalent in the beginning of the
Theosophical movement, to the effect that there
was something especially Eastern in the higher
Adeptship. The Master of Occultism is bound by no
limitations of nationality, will be sometimes in
an Eastern as often in a Western incarnation. He
belongs to the World! not to any single section
of its people, however large that section may be.
The main idea in relation to the Masters that I
want to enforce is this: they belong to the
Divine Hierarchy that presides over the evolution
of mankind, and as regards their work in guiding
human progress, as definitely as they are able,
are absolutely at one, in thought and intention,
with the still higher agents in that sublime
hierarchy. They may not always find it possible
to steer humanity exactly as they would wish. We,
in this life, collectively constitute a craft
that often fails to answer to the helm. And, as I
endeavoured to explain in a former article

entitled "Our Unseen Enemies and Allies," ¹ we
are terribly mixed up with inimical agencies bent
upon interfering with the Divine purpose at every
available opportunity. If it were not for the
ceaseless, untiring efforts of our unknown
protectors to shield us from the consequences of
such attacks, the civilization of the world, the
further evolution of the whole human race, would
be utterly wrecked.
_____________
¹ See Nineteenth Century and After, October, 1915.

For various reasons it is highly desirable that
the world should understand this. The services
the Masters render us, in harmony with the
influence of the whole hierarchy to which they
belong, would be rendered just as zealously,
however ignorant we might be of the benefits
conferred upon us. Divine agents do not work for
reward. But if the matter is rightly understood
it will be seen that we are the people who would
be richly rewarded, if we became cognizant of the
benefits conferred, and were, so to speak,
grateful accordingly. It is true, indeed, that if
such gratitude were widely felt and associated
with clear comprehension of the way in which our
Elder Brethen, the Unseen Masters, are struggling
on super-physical planes with the Powers of Evil
on our behalf, they would in a certain degree be
strengthened in the struggle they are carrying
on. Success does not depend on such reinforcement
of strength; that is certain and assured, but the
duration of the struggle, on which the duration
of the War depends, might be to some extent
affected in the way above described.
Meanwhile the more subtle reward we should secure
by gratefully appreciating the protection
afforded us has to do with a law of Nature
familiar to the occultist, and of growing
importance to humanity as evolution proceeds.

Spiritual help of the kind affecting the
spiritual welfare and progress of each human unit
can only be rendered by higher beings in response
to aspiration from the level of this life. We
must look up, in order that they may look down,
in the manner affecting individual progress. The
progress of the world collectively will go on,
anyhow, when the terrible crisis through which it
is passing is over, because some of us will
assuredly be looking up, and these in the course
of time will drag on the rest. In that way the
evolution and progress of the race, as a whole,
is provided for, but it will be appreciably
accelerated if those who look up, in the way
described, become appreciably more numerous than
the mere laws of average would ensure. And the
acceleration of progress, as regards the upwardlookers themselves, might be more remarkable than
they can readily imagine. Not indeed that such a
spiritually selfish motive ought to be mainly
operative in bringing about the state of feeling
that should prevail. From the point of view of
the mere occult student on this plane of life, it
is disgusting that the great multitude around us
should be, so to speak, sopping up the benefits
conferred upon them by the Masters collectively
and failing even to be decently thankful. Any
Master who may take cognizance of this that I am
writing would, I fancy, laugh at the notion that
they could be supposed to want gratitude, but
none the less all that I have written above holds
good, and anyhow I know that they are eager to
help all who are ready to be helped, and
therefore are more than pleased when such help is
consciously invoked. At earlier stages of the
world's growth they had to remain concealed. The
stake and the torture chambers of the Church
awaited those who tried to proclaim any faith
nobler than that of the priests. The Masters had
to bide their time. But their time has now come.
The world is ripe to have its religious thought
levelled up to harmonize with the sublime
realities of Divine government, and the dangers

of allowing spiritual truth to be set free from
medieval corruption have at last become
negligible.
A good deal in advance of the modern occult
development, a book called A Suggestive Inquiry
into the Hermetic Mystery, published fifty years
ago, gave out some information about alchemy (the
occultism of the Middle Ages) that some devotees
of that study at the time thought dangerously
frank. The author answers the criticism by
anticipation in words which I will leave, in
conclusion, as applicable also to such
explanations as it has been my privilege to put
forward:
If we have been free in our expositions the spirit was
not the more reckless but because the thresholds of
ignorance are already overpast. . . . They are all now
incredulous who were formerly dreaded in their belief,
and under that safe guardianship we leave them happily
supine in the conviction that our conduct will neither be
attractive nor intelligible, much less practically
useful, to the profane multitude of mankind.

THE OCCULTISM IN TENNYSON'S POETRY
A FEW among the great host of his devotees who,
besides appreciating the varied beauties of
Tennyson's poetry, are in touch with modern
developments of the Higher Occultism, will be
alive to the significance of some hints scattered
through his writings showing how he, in advance
of modern developments, intuitively divined some
important principles now emerging from obscurity
into the light. Even highly cultured and
appreciative readers, unless also students of
occultism, may pass them by unnoticed. Sir Alfred
Lyall, for example, in his generally admirable
survey of Tennyson's work, contributed to the
series of "English Men of Letters," overlooks
some glaring hints of the kind in question, while
actually dealing with the mere literary charm of
one poem mainly devoted to the present
elucidation of occult ideas.
The elucidation of the passages thus hinting at
hitherto hidden mysteries of spiritual Nature is
the purpose of the present article, but it must
not be held to imply that the writer seeks to
enrol Tennyson in the ranks of professed
occultists. Of course, the splendour of his
genius shone chiefly in his treatment of purely
human emotion. And we, who have passed through
life side by side with the poetic stream of his
creation that flowed through the greater part of
the last century, have derived our most intense
pleasure from the perfection of his earlier
verse, apart from the beauty of the thoughts it
conveyed. Then came the Idylls of the King in
their stately magnificence, but they have nothing
to do with occultism. A truly great poet can
never be a specialist in any one vein of
creation, though in whatever vein he is
following, Tennyson seems for the moment to be a
specialist in that. The Lady of Shalott, The Day
Dream, The Lotos-Eaters, and many others of that
period, surpass in their musical charm any

previous verse in English literature, though
Byron and Moore sometimes touched the same level.
And the way in which Locksley Hall might be
criticized, like Hamlet, as "full of
quotations," shows how Tennyson was a specialist
among poets in coining phrases that linger in
universal memory, while the Idylls of the King
lead some of us to forget that the supreme master
of blank verse was equally unrivalled in dealing
with rhyme. But after all, however highly we may
appreciate his art, that merely renderd the
surface worthy of the substance of his poetry.
So much in advance to show that the interest some
of us may take in the flashes of occult
inspiration to be discerned in Tennyson's poems
need not separate us from the sympathy of
worshipers who live in a more familiar
atmosphere. Nor from the point of view of occult
students, who have profited by the flood of light
let in of late on mysteries previously obscure,
will the flashes in question show that Tennyson
was completely in possession of knowledge which
humbler mortals at the present day are inheriting
without an effort. Indeed, innumerable allusions
to death and the hereafter in In Memoriam are
hardly tinged with any philosophy deeper than
ordinary religious feeling, and in The Two Voices
the second voice, which sweeps away the
comfortless reasoning of the first, offers merely
A little hint to solace Woe A hint, a whisper breathing low,

a mere "hidden hope." And yet the same poem
contains a passage that might almost be reckoned
among the flashes of inspiration, suggesting the
theory of life now reduced to a scientific shape,
and gradually winning consent in all directions the doctrine of Reincarnation:

I cannot make this matter plain,
But I would shoot, howe'er in vain,
A random arrow from the brain.
It may be that no life is found,
Which only to one engine bound
Falls off, but cycles always round.
As old mythologies relate,
Some draught of Lethe might await
The slipping thro' from state to state.
As here we find in trances, men
Forget the dream that happens then,
Until they fall in trance again.

I need not expand the quotation. The poem from
which it comes will be familiar to all
Tennysonian enthusiasts, and the passage to which
I call attention embodies a thought far more
fully treated in later utterances; but before
dealing with them it is worth while to turn back
to one of his very earliest fragments entitled
The Mystic, written when Tennyson could not have
been more than seventeen, and to be found, I
think, in one edition of the Poems by Two
Brothers. It begins:
Angels have talked with him and shown him thrones,
Ye knew him not, he was not one of ye,
Ye scorned him with an undiscerning scorn,
Ye could not read the marvel in his eye,
The still serene abstraction he hath felt.

Skipping a great deal to the same general effect,
we come to the final lines, which are as follows:
How could ye know him? Ye were yet within
The narrower circle: he had well-nigh reached
The last which with a region of white flame
Pure without heat into a larger air
Upburning and an ether of black blue
Investeth and engirds all other lives.

As far as the form of this poem is concerned we
need not trace any of the lines, though some of
them are dignified and worthy of the subject, to
anything in the nature of verbal inspiration. As
the Memoir by his son shows us, Tennyson wrote
verse when he was only eight years old, and the
Memoir gives us some fairly long and harmonious
examples of his boyhood's work, never published
during his life, written when he was fourteen or
fifteen. Everyone familiar with the principle of
Reincarnation will readily understand that so
great a poet as Tennyson must have been a poet
already in former lives, and could not but bring
over the capacity for poetic expression, so that
inspiration, merely conveying an idea, could rely
on the new personality to clothe it in
appropriate language. Thus, although the ideas
underlying The Mystic can hardly be regarded as
originating in the mind of a boy of seventeen,
the words conveying them may have been entirely
his own.
The description of The Mystic is not appropriate
to any one on the ordinary plane of life to whom
that term might apply. Writers on the
philosophical system generally called
"Mysticism" are "Mystics" in one sense, but may
not have any characteristics resembling those
described in the poem. Those are the
characteristics which - with others - belong to
the highly evolved "Elder Brethen" of the human
race - now generally spoken of as the Masters of
Wisdom, of whom - since they themselves have
communicated more freely than in former times
with the ordinary plane of life - we have come to
know a good deal. That they inspire many modern
writers with ideas for them to work up in the
progress of literature, art, and science is now
clearly realized by their pupils in occultism.
Conventional thinking has hitherto made at once
too much and too little of inspiration. It has
been conceived as only of very rare occurrence in

connection with writings of a sacred character,
its frequency being thus very limited, while its
source is thought of as altogether Divine. It is
really of constant occurrence and emanates from
all levels of the Divine Hierarchy. The extent to
which writers and artists (those with some lofty
purpose in their work) are "helped" by invisible
beings, on a higher plane of life than their own,
can hardly be exaggerated, so there is indeed
little reason to be surprised at finding a
youthful poet of Tennyson's promise under
inspiration from a very early period.
But the world was not ripe in the year 1826 for
the gift of any detailed information concerning
the actual constitution of the Divine Hierarchy,
with its varied levels of dignity and power and
intricate agencies. In 1892, towards the close of
the great poet's life, conditions had changed in
a very remarkable degree. And the flashes of
inspiration to which Tennyson lent himself then
became wonderfully distinct. A few verses to be
found in the volume published in that year, and
entitled By an Evolutionist, are deeply
suggestive. We read as follows:
The
And
And
And

Lord let the house of a brute to the soul of a man,
the man said "Am I your debtor?"
the Lord - "Not yet: but make it as clean as you can,
then I will let you a better."

Occult students will recognize in these few lines
a flood of significant allusion. The words alone
may have no deep meaning for readers unfamiliar
with the great principles hinted at, but for
those who know more they are richly significant.
They include, to begin with, the fundamental idea
that humanity is evolved from humbler animal
life, and beyond this they recognize the method
of that evolution - the transfer of Consciousness
from Lower to Higher Vehicles as the consequence
of its own craving for the higher. They recognize

more than that indeed - a deep and supremely
important idea concerning the nature of
consciousness. This is one of the latest
developments of advanced occult teaching.
Consciousness - that supreme mystery that baffles
all physiological research - is uniform in its
character throughout all manifestations of life.
There is only one kind of consciousness: that of
human beings and of the animal creation is the
same throughout. Its effective value depends on
the vehicle in which it is working. In the body
of an animal it has greatly expanded capacities.
In the vehicles of consciousness belonging to
higher planes it finds these capacities again
expanded to an extent which ordinary humanity, at
the average stage reached in this world at the
present time, cannot even grasp in imagination.
At every stage of the process the same law works.
Any given volume of consciousness within any
given vehicle, gradually becoming an
individuality, establishes a claim on Nature for
an improved vehicle, by making the best possible
use of the one it has got. "Make it as clean as
you can, and then I will let you a better."
We can understand the law best by concentrating
attention on humanity first. The man at an early
stage of his progress cannot ascend to great
heights of achievement. He may be fit for little
more than the rougher manual work of physical
life. But being by that time a man, he has - if
only a glimmering - perception of the difference
between right and wrong. He follows the guidance
of this perception. He makes the vehicle of his
consciousness (which is himself) "as clean as he
can." In his next incarnation he infallibly
acquires "a better." Thus the verse above quoted,
among other ideas, clearly recognizes the
principle of Reincarnation, which Tennyson
evidently accepted without reserve and worked
with continually. In the Memoir of Alfred, Lord
Tennyson by his son we are told that he left a
Note to Section xliii. of In Memoriam, which runs

as follows:
If the immediate life after death be only sleep, and the
spirit between this life and the next should be folded
like a flower in a night slumber, then the rememberance
of the last night remains as the smell and colour do in
the sleeping flower, and in that case the memory of our
love would last as true and would live as pure and whole
within the spirit of my friend until after it was
unfolded at the breaking of the morn when the sleep was
over.

In writing this Tennyson was evidently
concentrating thought on the idea of rebirth and
the recovery of the love-relations of the
previous life. Even if the intervening period
were merely a sleep the true Ego would reappear
in the awakening life. The more scientific view
of reincarnation, of course - while confidently
recognizing that idea - realizes the immense
importance of the intervening life on higher
planes. Sometimes, indeed, if the Ego is at a
humble stage of its expansion, the intervening
period, though restful and happy, is little
better than a blissful sleep. In others it
affords magnificent opportunities for the
cultivation of intellectual or artistic capacity.
True, such growth can only take place as a
consequence of some effective seed of aspiration
or effort sown in the previous physical life, but
even minute seeds of that nature are nuclei from
which splendid consequences may ensue, without in
any way interfering with the revival of old loves
and even minor friendships dating back to the
past. The disregard of this important aspect of
the subject operates to render the idea of
reincarnation unattractive to people who
understand it imperfectly. They think of
themselves beginning a new life all alone as it
were. This is a ridiculous misapprehension of the
natural law. A moment's thought should show that
probability points to the idea that generations
living about the same time will - on the average

- get through their intervening lives on higher
planes, and be ready for reincarnation at about
the same time later on. Where personal ties of
love or even less powerful affinities associate
Egos together, their return together becomes a
matter of certainty. Adequately trained
clairvoyance is equal to the task of verifying
that principle, and tracing back, even through
ages in the past, the former lives of living
people.
Whenever genuine mutual affection unites people
on this plane of life, they are always found to
have been in affectionate relationship in former
lives also. There may have been considerable
differences in intellectual growth even, but the
love-tie is supreme, and the ingenuity of the
natural law - or of those who guide the natural
law - is equal to the emergency in such cases,
and to much more complicated problems of
"Karma" - the convenient term which embraces,
among other meanings, the necessity that moral
causes engendered in one life shall reap their
appropriate consequences in lives of later date.
Now let us turn to the last verse of the brief
poem, of which the first has been quoted above:
I have climb'd to the snows of Age, and I gaze at a field
in the Past,
Where I sank with the body at times in the sloughs of a
low desire,
But I hear no yelp of the beast, and the Man is quiet at
last
As he stands on the heights of his life with a glimpse of
a height that is higher.

The last few words of the last line - "a glimpse
of a height that is higher" - hint unmistakably
at the sublime possibilities of Initiation. There
is no finality in the vast process of human
evolution, but there are recognizable stages. The
perfect Man has reached one of those stages, from

which he looks forward to spiritual attainment
transcending any condition that can be limited by
the term humanity. I need not attempt to
elaborate that idea; but we shall see reason to
believe that the poet knew more of the height
that is higher than he found it possible to put
into words.
The law under which Divine consciousness in
humanity seeks and secures better and better
vehicles operates also throughout the lower
kingdoms. It is not easily traced through animal
and vegetable manifestations, but even faintly
understood it illuminates the whole doctrine of
Evolution. Occult students at one time were
inclined to find fault with the Darwinian
presentation of the idea, as ignoring the
evolution of consciousness going on concurrently
with the evolution of form. We see now that the
evolution of form defines the evolution of
consciousness. Consciousness is very far from
being a mere attribute of the form, as some
materialistic scientists of the last century
imagined, but the expression of its infinite
capacities depends on the form in which it is
working. This view of the subject is worthy of
protracted treatment; but there are other poems
that claim examination.
A little fragment - merely two verses - entitled
The Making of Man, is well worth attention, but
does not do more that reiterate some of the ideas
in the verses last discussed. It recognizes the
nature of the tiger and the ape as necessarily
manifesting in humanity at first, but
Prophet-eyes may catch a glory slowly gaining on the
shade,
Till the peoples all are one and all their voices blend
in choric
Hallelujah to the Maker - "It is finished. Man is made."

We may now turn to the poem which is the fullest
expression of occult inspiration among all that
suggest that origin - The Ancient Sage. This,
indeed, includes evidence showing that Tennyson
in his own consciousness had attained to definite
knowledge relating to spiritual conditions far
transcending those familiar to the average
humanity of our period. The Ancient Sage was
published in the volume entitled "Tiresias and
other Poems," just preceding the latest of all "Demeter and other Poems." The "Sage," obviously
a Master of Wisdom, criticises a "scroll" by a
young companion who has embodied sceptical,
almost materialistic, views in very graceful
verse. The scroll recognizes that "the earth is
fair in hue,"
But man to-day is fancy's fool
As man hath ever been.
The nameless Power, or Powers, that rule
Were never heard or seen.

The Master comments on this:
If thou wouldst hear the Nameless, and wilt dive
Into the Temple-cave of thine own self,
There, brooding by the central altar, thou
Mayst haply learn the Nameless hath a voice,
By which thou wilt abide, if thou be wise.

The scroll still quarrels with the mystery.
And since - from when this earth began The Nameless never came
Among us, never spake with man,
And never named the Name.

And the Sage answers with almost the best passage
in the whole poem:

Thou canst not prove the Nameless, O my son,
Nor canst thou prove the world thou movest in,
Thou canst not prove that thou art body alone,
Nor canst thou prove that thou art spirit alone,
Nor canst thou prove that thou art both in one:
Thou canst not prove thou art immortal, no,
Nor yet that thou art mortal - nay my son,
Thou canst not prove that I, who speak with thee,
Am not thyself in converse with thyself,
For nothing worthy proving can be proven,
Nor yet disproven: wherefore thou be wise,
Cleave ever to the sunnier side of doubt,
And cling to Faith beyond the forms of Faith!

After a passage in the scroll relating to the
darkness and miseries of life, the Sage replies:
Who knows but that the darkness is in man?
The doors of Night may be the gates of Light;
For wert thou born or blind or deaf, and then
Suddenly heal'd, how wouldst thou glory in all
The splendours and the voices of the world!

And this leads up to the most striking passage in
the poem, in which the Sage - in this case
Tennyson himself - got "out of the body," to use
a phrase familiar to occult students, by adopting
a method with which they are quite familiar. This
consists of self-induced hypnotism brought on by
repeating - alone and aloud - one's own name. The
repetitions may have to be very numerous, running
perhaps into hundreds, and even then the effort
may be futile unless the person making it has
some psychic potentialities in his nature. But
granting that last condition, it is an effective
process, and one which Tennyson seems to have
been almost in the habit of using. His reference
to it in the poem before us is as follows:
for more than once when I
Sat all alone, revolving in myself
The word that is the symbol of myself,

The mortal limit of the Self was loosed,
And past into the Nameless, as a cloud
Melts into Heaven. I touched my limbs, the limbs
Were strange not mine - and yet no shade of doubt,
But utter clearness, and thro' loss of Self
The gain of such large life as match'd with ours
Were Sun to spark - unshadowable in words,
Themselves but shadows of a shadow world.

I cannot identify any other allusion in the whole
range of Tennyson's poetry that directly relates
to experiences of this nature, but in the Memoir
his Son tells us that
in some phases of thought and feeling his idealism tended
more decidedly to mysticism. He wrote: "A kind of waking
trance I have frequently had quite up from boyhood when I
have been all alone. This has generally come upon me
through repeating my own name two or three times to
myself silently, till all at once, as it were out of the
intensity of the consciousness of individuality, the
individuality itself seemed to dissolve and fade away
into a boundless being, and this not a confused state but
the clearest of the clearest, the surest of the surest,
the weirdest of the weirdest, utterly beyond words, where
death was an almost laughable impossibility, the loss of
personality (if so it were) seeming no extinction but the
only true life! This might be said to be the state which
St. Paul describes, 'Whether in the body I cannot tell,
or whether out of the body I cannot tell!'" He continued:
"I am ashamed of my feeble description. Have I not said
the state is utterly beyond words? But in a moment when I
come back to my normal state of 'sanity' I am ready to
fight for mein liebes Ich and hold that it will last for
aeons of aeons." In the same way he said that there might
be a more intimate communion than we could dream of
between the living and the dead, at all events for a
time.

So the spiritualists may fairly claim Tennysonian
sanction for the fundamental principle of their
belief, which indeed is quite in harmony with the
views of advanced occult students, though some of
early date were misled into a needlessly hostile
mistrust of the system, apt in some cases to be
itself rather misleading, but which - as broadly

designed to assure a world drifting at one time
into materialsim that there is another life after
this, and so on - was a generous gift to
civilization from levels of higher wisdom.
Readers of the Memoir will derive, from a very
unexpected source, confirmation of the fact that
Tennyson made frequent use of the repeated-name
method of attaining spiritual illumination. It
appears that the author asked Professor Tyndall
to make some contribution to the work in hand. In
the course of a long answer he says:
I looked up the account of my first visit to Farringford,
and there to my profound astonishment I found described
that experience of your father's which, in the mouth of
the Ancient Sage, was made the ground of an important
argument against materialism and in favour of personal
immortality eight-and-twenty years afterwards. . . . If
you turn to your father's account of the wonderful state
of consciousness super-induced by thinking of his own
name and compare it with the argument of the Ancient Sage
you will see that they refer to one and the same
phenomenon.

The injunctions which the Sage ultimately gives
to his pupil, described in the beginning as
one that loved, and honour'd him, and yet
Was no disciple, richly garb'd, but worn
From wasteful living . . .

sweep over the whole range of occult ethics. I
pick out a few lines from a passage too long to
quote in extenso:
Let
And
And
Nor
*

be thy wail and help thy fellow men,
make thy gold thy vassal not thy king,
send the day into the darken'd heart;
list for guerdon in the voice of men,
*

*

*

*

*

Nor
Nor
Nor
And
Nor
Nor
And

roll thy viands on a luscious tongue,
drown thyself with flies in honied wine;
thou be rageful, like a handled bee,
lose thy life by usage of thy sting;
harm an adder thro' the lust for harm,
make a snail's horn shrink for wantonness;
more - think well! Do-well will follow thought.

Each injunction will be familiar to readers of
theosophical books, and a fortiori to all
students of the Higher Occultism, and that last
phrase, "Do-well will follow thought," is an
almost amusing reflection of a more elaborate
doctrine set forth in certain manuals that
profess to guide candidates for initiation in the
higher mysteries. They are told first to purify
thought, and secondly to purify conduct. From the
commonplace point of view that seems putting the
cart before the horse, but action may sometimes
be thoughtless, and then if it were avoided for
no definite reason it would probably be repeated
for no definite reason. If purified thought
preceded its avoidance, the cure would be
permanent.
It is needless to carry on further the search for
occult allusions in Tennyson's poetry. Fainter
hints, in the order of those already quoted,
might be pointed out in poems less definitely
infused with occult inspiration than The Ancient
Sage, but the broad conclusion to be derived from
them all is sufficiently well established. The
deeper mysteries of life and nature were still
veiled from general knowledge during the greater
part of Tennyson's splendid literary activity. It
was not his task to tear down the veil
completely, nor did the rifts he made in it here
and there afford his readers anything resembling
that scientific comprehension of great natural
truths lying behind it which many of us have
ultimately reached. This attainment inaugurates a
new era of thought. But Tennyson intuitively
forecast the revelation impending. And perhaps

for the cultured classes of this period, slow
hitherto to appreciate the significance of the
Higher Occultism, the fact that its development
was so clearly foreshadowed in the writings of a
man so universally reverenced as Tennyson, may
guide modern sympathies into regions of thought
which they might never have explored but for that
august leadership.

CREEDS MORE OR LESS CREDIBLE
SINCE the amusing period when Bishop Colenso
discovered that the hare does not chew the cud as the author of the Pentateuch had supposed the "Allegory," on the banks of the Nile and
elsewhere, has been busy chewing the primitive
faith of good people previously content to accept
statements in the Bible as necessarily true, even
when somewhat surprising. Tempers were often lost
during the discussions of the Colenso and Darwin
days, but Allegory has proved a more goodhumoured beast than he was thought to be at
first, so that critics and the Church can give
and take now with a superficial pretence of being
friends in reality. Beyond this, indeed, the
attitudes of mind on both sides are undergoing
change. The ribald scoffer is extinct. The D.D.
who still attributes the sufferings of the world
to Eve's conversation with the Serpent hides
quietly in cathedral towns. Science and Theology
are on the terms that Talleyrand described as
established between himself and the Host, when he
raised his hat to a Roman Catholic procession:
"Nous nous saluons mais nous ne parlons pas." And
happily these relations are still improving.
Science, of the old materialistic order, has had
to endure many shocks of late. A police
magistrate some years ago refused to believe
overwhelming testimony in favour of a
spiritualist medium on the ground that it was
contrary to the known laws of Nature. The members
of the Royal Society are no longer so sure of
having completely catalogued those laws. And the
doubt makes them even respectful to the theory of
miracles. After all, turning water into wine is
child's play compared with the miracle
accomplished whenever artificial incubation turns
an egg into a chicken. People who still
disbelieve in the phenomena of genuine
spiritualism - as puzzling as any records in
Christian story - must guard their ignorance very
carefully if they wish to preserve their

opinions. Science in all directions is
negotiating with the unseen, and the wise
churchman realizes that some concessions on his
part may lead to a settle peace, promising
protection for institutions and substantial
interests he sometimes felt to be in danger from
the battering ram. Already there is an entente
more or less cordiale between the enlightened
Free Thinker - shedding the folly of denying
whatever he does not understand - and the
churchman who knows that he must adapt his faith
to the uniformites of Nature, that it is often
unsafe to insist that "sacred" writings always
mean what they seem to say.
But questions have arisen that are more
embarrassing than the reconciliation of Scripture
with obvious physical facts. And these challenge
statements that cannot take sanctuary in any
theory of Divine inspiration. The language of the
Creeds must at all events be ascribed to human
authorship. This is complicated and to some
extent obscure, but in criticizing the Creeds we
are not in trouble with any theory of verbal
inspiration from Divine levels. The Revised
Version of the Bible - humbly attempting to
correct a few gross errors of translation - has
(according to a familiar anecdote) been treated
with faint praise by a sturdy exponent of the
early faith who preferred "God's own words." But
the words adopted to define Christian belief at
Nicæa in A.D.325 were simply those of certain
bishops, who prevailed over other bishops
desirous of using different words, so we cannot
well bring inspiration into the story. Again, the
Nicene Creed was preceded by an extensive "creed
literature" - to use the phrase of an orthodox
writer, though it would be scarcely possible now
to identify any writing as the first attempt to
put Christian belief on paper. Nor does the
importance of the subject at the present time
turn upon its historical aspect. The question
arising is this: Do the Creeds, as they are put

into the mouths of people who attend church at
the present day, express beliefs they can
possibly be expected to entertain? The question
may fairly be described as having arisen, because
it has been recently the subject of
correspondence in The Times. Canon Glazebrook in
a book called The Faith of a Modern Churchman
says that the clauses in the Apostles' Creed "Born of the Virgin Mary" and "The third day He
rose again from the dead" - can legitimately be
interpreted "symbolically." The Bishop of Ely, in
a letter addressed to Canon Glazebrook and also
published in The Times, refuses to accept this
view, and supports his refusal by quoting a
resolution adopted by "the bishops of the whole
Anglican Communion assembled at the Lambeth
Conference in 1908," which runs as follows: "The
Conference in view of tendencies widely shown in
writings of the present day hereby places on
record its conviction that the historical facts
stated in the Creeds are an essential part of the
faith of the Church." Canon Glazebrook, in a long
letter published in The Times of May 21, does not
argue the question on its merits but quotes
episcopal sayings that deprecate undue
limitations on freedom of thought and inquiry,
and attributes to the Bishop of Oxford a view of
the Ascension which he summarizes in this way:
"Our Lord could not, for astronomical reasons of
which the disciples were ignorant, physically
ascend into Heaven. But in order give to them a
right conception of His change of state He rose
to a moderate height in the air, and then so
veiled Himself behind a cloud that they believed
Him to have gone right up into the vault of the
sky." If the Bishop is fairly represented by this
summary the suggestion needs expansion. What was
the later course of events? When our Lord, having
deluded His disciples in the manner described,
wanted to come down again, how did He conceal His
reappearance? But while the Bishop's hypothesis
tempts further comment, this might seem wanting
in due reverence for the main idea concerned, so

no more on that subject need be said for the
moment.
And yet that line of speculation in reference to
alleged occurrences that outrage common sense, is
one into which it is easy to be driven if people
are content to think of Nature as simply
consisting of that which appeals to the five
senses, even though the whole may be vaguely
regarded as bathed in spiritual conditions
intangible as Thought, out of relation with Space
or Time, offering nothing to the imagination that
can prefigure a future existence, except of a
kind to be spoken of with bated breath and
avoided as long as possible. Only for those,
happily a large and increasing number, who
comprehended more or less completely the
intervening conditions of Nature lying between
the dense manifestation of the physical plane and
the "incomprehensible" (though not less real)
conditions of exalted planes - only by virtue of
their superior enlightenment is it possible to
get rid - first of the dread commonly connected
with the process of passing on, and secondly of
the embarrassment arising from occasional
occurrences which without such enlightenment must
either be disbelieved in defiance of evidence or
dealt with by some grotesquely foolish
explanation.
That idea applies very forcibly to the study of
the Creeds. The writers who reduced them to their
present shape may have been using physical plane
language in a metaphorical sense, or they may
simply have swallowed without hesitation
statements absurd on their face. But in either
case we have to recognize, in the light of modern
occult knowledge, that somewhere in the back
history of the Creeds such knowledge must have
been in the possession of some person or persons
who inspired the earliest writers on the subject.
And we reach, with the same confidence, the
conclusion that current versions of the Creeds

have been the product of painfully clumsy
editing. Such work could only have been carried
out properly by editors saturated with knowledge
of natural conditions unseen by the multitude,
while the actual editors were certainly not of
that type. As a mere first illustration of that
idea we may take the few words in the Apostles'
Creed about the Resurrection and the Ascension:
"The third day He rose again from the dead; He
ascended into heaven and sitteth on the right
hand of God the Father," etc. For people who can
only think of a Being still in touch with the
Earth as of human flesh and bones, the statement
must either be rejected altogether as fabulous,
or must lead to conceptions which, followed out
in detail, are deplorably downgrading. But
directly we begin to understand how human
personalities may function in full consciousness,
after escaping (for a time or for good) from
imprisonment in the physical body - functioning
in another available vehicle, the astral body we see light shed on alleged phenomena otherwise
inexplicable. Many of us know now that natural
law even provides for the temporary
materialization of the astral form so that it may
become apparent to physical senses. The story of
the Ascension thus comes within the range of
comprehensible occurrences, even if we make no
attempt to interpret it by more profound thinking
in another way altogether.
Perhaps to understand its origin properly we must
pay attention first to the ritual adopted in
ancient Egypt in connection with initiation in
the Mysteries, ages before the Christian era. The
candidate lay down on a great wooden cross
hollowed out so as to support the figure; was
bound on it (quite loosely so as to suggest the
voluntary character of the sacrifice) and then
was put (mesmerically) into a deep trance which
involved the emergence from the body of his real
consciousness in the astral form. The body was
then deposited in a sarcophagus, to typify

burial. In the astral body the real entity was
confronted with varied experiences educating him
in the idea that he - the real entity - was
beyond the reach of injury from fire, water, or
even the subtler perils of the under-world. Then,
on the third day the physical body was brought up
into the light of the sunrise, and its
"resurrection" - the return to it of the real Ego
- was accomplished.
Followed out more closely, the Egyptian ceremony
included other super-physical suggestions that
may have been in the mind of those who sketched
the earliest draft of the Creed. Before being
awakened the candidate had touch, out of the
body, with sublime levels of consciousness, as
definitely an ascent into heaven as the underworld experiences were a descent into hell. The
under-world in question is, of course, only a
part, a low subdivision, of the enormous astral
world that surrounds the physical globe, and is
growing familiar in these days to many explorers.
Its loftier realms are widely expanded regions
that provide for happy conditions of life, and
for happy conditions as varied as there are
variations, amongst people still in life of
aspirations pointing to happiness.
How did it come to pass that allusions to the
ritual of the Egyptian Mysteries found their way
into the Christian Creed? To frame a conjecture
we must begin by realizing that the Egyptian
ceremonial was itself an allegory based on
fundamental ideas connected with the science of
human evolution - fully understood by those who
invented the ritual. We can see this hinting at
the ordeal of suffering incidental to the
physical life, at the possibility of further
suffering in the under-world as the penalty of
evil-doing here, at the restful touch with
happier conditions (the ascent into heaven), at
the return to Earth-life after this - the
resurrection or more literally the reincarnation

of the Ego. Whoever infused into that early
"creed literature" the first suggestion for a
formula of belief must have had the Egyptian
allegory in his mind, together with a perfect
comprehension of its deep meaning, as also
embodied in the Christian story.
For many reasons besides those that have to do
with the illumination of the Creeds, it is
deplorable that the clergy at large do not avail
themselves of growing knowledge concerning the
unseen worlds, which might enable them in turn to
become more or less competent spiritual teachers.
Some few are emerging from the stagnant majority,
but for the rest to pose as experts in dealing
with the interests of humanity lying outside
those of the current life, while remaining
ignorant of all that is now becoming known
concerning the life hereafter, is like claiming
to practice as a doctor without knowing more
about the human body than was known to the
barber-surgeons of the Middle Ages. Even the
humblest spiritualist has realized that life
hereafter is accessible to investigation. He may
investigate very clumsily. His grasp even of the
main idea may be very incomplete, but he knows
that he is in touch with another plane of
existence; that death, for all decent people is
an introduction to life of a more promising kind
than that which the physical plane provides for
as a rule. The average clergyman, meanwhile, will
not avail himself of the means by which he - with
a more cultivated mind - might not only realize
this much, but expand his comprehenson of the
ultimate spiritual possibilities awaiting
humanity, to an enormous extent. If it were not
so profoundly distressing there would be
something supremely ludicrous in the spectacle of
a vast organisation, whose raison d'être is the
general human thirst for guidance in spiritual
thought, resolutely keeping aloof from avenues of
research provided by abundant experience to be
richly stored with spiritual wisdom for all who

explore them.
This view of the matter will become more and more
impressive when attention is turned to those
passages in the Creeds which relate to the Virgin
Birth. For those who can only think in terms of
physical plane matter, the Virgin Birth seems to
strain imagination less than an ascent to heaven
by a tangible flesh-and-blood Christ. Birth of
any sort is a mystery. A virgin birth would be
only a little more mysterious than one of the
ordinary kind. But the first thought that
suggests a pause for reflection arises from the
undeniable fact that other religions before
Christianity claim virgin births for their
founders. Is this merely due to a pious desire in
each case to dignify the origin of the founder,
or can it bear a more intricate explanation? This
is certainly the case in reference to the
adaptation of the familiar doctrine to the
Christian story. To get at the actual truth
hinted at metaphorically by the virgin birth
idea, we must go rather deeply into modern
developments of super-physical science.
By its help we are enabled to recognize the
creative achievement, when a Solar system comes
into existence, as involving successive
processes: first the formation of molecular
matter from the atomic raw material pervading all
space. We need not talk about the origin of that,
any more than about the beginning of eternity.
But a Solar System has a beginning and a destiny.
It is an episode in eternity, and the creation of
a world is an episode within the enormously
protracted life of a Solar System. Molecular
matter constituting in its various aspects the
chemical elements (as they used to be called)
becomes available for the formation of a globe
destined to be a living planet. We see the
process still going on in the growth of nebulæ
with which the heavens abound. At a later stage
Divine power pours out from itself the life

principle. The vegetable and animal kingdoms come
into existence. Later, again, when the human
stage is reached, a further emanation from
divinity invests definite beings with what is
sometimes called "the Divine Spark," with that
which renders such beings immortal, capable of
developing through successive Earth-lives the
loftier attributes of intellect and spirituality.
The three stages are described by many phrases:
sometimes as three waves of Atmic influence;
sometimes as the first, second, and third Logos;
sometimes as the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.
Now when we attempt to see how this view of
creation affects the language of the Apostles'
and Nicene Creeds, we have to keep in touch with
another line of thought. The history of the
Creeds points to a definite human origin, but the
hints their language embodies point (as already
suggested) to inspiration from a lofty source of
wisdom; while it also betrays the corruption of
such hints as successive versions have been
prepared. Lofty wisdom has always lain hidden in
the hands of the Elder Brethen of the race, who
well knew that primitive conditions of
civilization would not allow of its general
diffusion.
The general diffusion, however, of large extracts
from it is now in progress, taking shape in the
Higher Occultism of recent years. Thus we can now
discern in much ancient writing of a religious
character the streak of inspiration and the
superposed blundering of unenlightened
transmitters of the inspiration. The passage in
the Apostles' Creed about the Virgin Birth is a
thrilling example of both influences. The
adjective "virgin" has been applied in very
ancient literature to matter, as due to the
action of the First Logos, or the first creative
wave. Only when - after intervening development it is touched with the Third Logos (or Holy
Ghost) can it engender the Christ principle. That

idea gets twisted, by primitive ignorance capable
only of thought along the lines of the physical
senses, into the idea of a conception by a woman
free of the conditions that generally give rise
to conception. And then in the Nicene Creed we
get the gross misunderstanding developed into the
unfortunate expression, "the only-begotten Son of
God."
How does this subtle interpretation of the
familiar language fit in with the Gospel story
which the Creeds seem to follow? The literal
accuracy of that story has been challenged by
critics who object to miracles, and nothing that
can be called contemporary authentic history
affords it any sanction; but from the occult
point of view - that is to say, from the point of
view of knowledge that relies on something much
more trustworthy than written history - the story
is contemplated in a deeply reverential spirit,
but is not treated throughout as a mere record of
occurrences. The occultist has resources at his
disposal when investigating the past that leave
mere literary research panting in the rear. The
principle is intelligible to all who appreciate
the significance of clairvoyance, in some of its
suggestive developments. One kind enables the
clairvoyant to take cognizance of events going on
at the time in some distant place. Another kind
deals with events distant in past time. There is
a memory of Nature in which some clairvoyants can
share, and that is faultless in its exactitude.
Cairvoyants who can do this while living the
ordinary life among us are few, but now that the
veil between ourselves and the Masters of Wisdom,
our Elder Brethen, the Great Adepts, has been
lowered to an appreciable extent, many others
besides clairvoyants are in touch with Teachers
for whom perfect clairvoyance in time is as much
a natural faculty as common physical sight with
us. Thus we need not be all dependent, when
desirous of knowing what really happened in
Palestine when Christianity was inaugurated, on

Alexandrian writers who endeavoured to frame the
record some centuries later. The memory of Nature
may discredit the literal accuracy of that record
without impairing in the faintest degree the
reverential feeling with which we contemplate the
inauguration. The sublimity of the Christ
incarnation is all the better understood when we
get rid of the idea that Jesus when a baby was
already the Christ. No great spiritual being,
taking a new physical plane birth for any reason
or definite purpose, ever takes charge of the new
body from infancy. That is done by one of his
disciples. At maturity the disciple quits the
body and the Master Ego occupies it. Most people
at the present day are so densely ignorant of
their own constitution that they may regard the
idea as bewildering. At a certain level of
knowledge the body is no more than a vesture to
be put on or off as occasion may require.
In the case of the Christ incarnation the Ego who
took charge of the body in the first instance was
indeed of no ordinary type. And through later
births Jesus (if we cling to the use of the old
name) has ascended to great altitudes in the
Divine Hierarchy. But the Christ, who made use of
the body he surrendered in Palestine, descended
for that purpose from a loftier altitude still.
The bundle of miscellaneous statements at the end
of the Apostles' Creed, and also imbedded in the
Nicene Creed, need not claim much attention
except so far as "the resurrection of the body"
has been a stumbling-block for all who realize
the gross absurdity of the phrase in its plain
meaning, and may not understand that the astral
body is that which resurges. But if we pass on to
a consideration of the third great Creed with
which orthodox Christianity is entangled, we have
to deal with a blend of wisdom and folly that is
very well worth the closest attention. In its
naked brutality the Athanasian Creed drives many
people out of churches in which it is read aloud.

Some clergymen will not consent to read it at
all. Others, whose orthodoxy is equal to the
digestion of any horrors clothed in theological
tradition, are able to do so. Meanwhile those in
a position to reconstruct the teaching
ludicrously caricatured by the language of the
Athanasian Creed may easily divest it of its
blasphemous absurdities and show it to have been
originally inspired by profound wisdom and
knowledge.
Summarized as it stands it consists of a series
of assertions that contradict one another,
together with a broad assurance that all who fail
to believe them both ways will be damned. "Perish
everlastingly" is the expression used at first,
but a reference later to "everlasting fire"
invests it with more specific meaning. To avoid
this fate we have to believe a string of
assertions frankly described as incomprehensible.
Strange to say, it is easy for any one who has
profited by the light thrown in recent years on
the course of human evolution to discern, behind
the gibberish of the Athanasian Creed as it
stands, the profoundly scientific ideas that some
exalted teacher of the past must have tried to
suggest to some insufficiently receptive mind
engaged in the effort to express them. For there
is a period in the history of every great human
race (ours is only one of many) when the state of
each person's "belief," or capacity to understand
deep spiritual truth, has an important bearing on
his subsequent progress. The Solar System
includes other human races besides our own.
Various planets represent humanities at various
stages of growth. Super-physical faculties even
far below those of "the Masters of Wisdom" (now
for the first time in this world's history giving
out such information freely) reveal the design of
the Solar system. Another planet was senior to
the Earth in its development, and its humanity is
already on a far higher level of evolution than
our own. Both human evolution is not a process in

which superior Divine power pushes the pieces
about, chessboard fashion, withour regard to
their own free will. The way in which this
sometimes seems to be done is at the bottom of a
hideous theological fancy, as grotesque as the
language of the Athanasian Creed, to the effect
that by Divine caprice some souls are "elect"
from the beginning, and sure of salvation from
hell-fire; others are surely destined from the
beginning to that fate. But what really happens
is this: some use their free will to accomplish
spiritual progress of infinite importance. Others
neglect their opportunities so persistently that
they are left behind; not doomed to any horrible
penalties, not annihiliated as entities, but left
to carry on their evolution, if they are willing
to do so, in the next great planetary scheme
following on in due order after the one they have
failed to profit by to its fullest extent. Of
course, it is impossible that anyone can begin to
understand all this without realizing the law of
reincarnation as clearly as we all realize the
circulation of the blood or any other fundamental
principle of Nature. But the appreciation of that
law corresponds to the state reached by a child
learning to read, when he has mastered the
alphabet.
Now in the light simply of the principle just
defined as guiding successive human evolutions in
the Solar System, we see in a flash the
underlying idea caricatured by the language of
the Athanasian Creed. Translate first the phrase
"Whosoever will be saved" from the blasphemous
meaning - saved from hell-fire - to that clearly
intended by the original inspirer: "Whosoever
would be safe from failure to attain the highest
possibilities of his place in Nature," must
"believe" or, in equivalent language, train
himself to understand, certain great subtleties
of spiritual truth which frankly for the physical
brain at an early stage of its development are
incomprehensible - i.e., beyond its grasp.

Physical, mental, and moral evolution proceed
concurrently. In a world at a far more advanced
stage than our Earth has yet reached, the
majority of the Egos (Souls, spiritual entities,
call them what you will) are engendering bodies
adapted to express Egos of similar advancement.
What is to be done, by the Powers that guide and
control incarnations, with the Egos that have
been so neglectful of their past opportunities
that they are not fit to animate the bodies of
the kind that are being born? The Powers in
question - and for the occultist they are
conscious Beings on a very high level - can only
do one thing with them - pass them on to the
scheme of human evolution next in order of
development. In other words, they have as a
consequence of their own neglect incurred the
inevitable necessity of beginning again. They are
not destined to perish everlastingly, but they
are thrown back in evolution for a long period.
All Oriental writings - and our "sacred"
scriptures including the Creeds are saturated
with the methods of Oriental writers - are prone
to use words like "eternity" and "everlasting" as
indicating any long period they are talking
about, and not as we do - with a specific
mathematical idea behind them.
Vastly more than the difficulty of reconciling
the triple aspect of Divinity with the essential
unity thereof is hinted at by the inspirer of the
Athanasian Creed, whose clumsy interpreters have
been content to hammer at the one problem of
recognizing trinity in unity. But the elaboration
of the teaching the inspirer sought to convey
would only have been possible for writers fully
illuminated with knowledge then "occult" in the
strictest sense of the term. Early theologians
were certainly not among such illuminati, and
those responsible for the language of the Creed
before us were so ill able to discriminate
between credibility and absurdity, that they wove
into their work the most loathsomely ridiculous

view of the Resurrection that any of the Creeds
suggest. Christ is described as sitting on the
right hand of the Father "at whose coming all men
shall rise again with their bodies, and shall
give account of their own works," with life or
damnation everlasting as the only varieties of
treatment available for their respective cases.
And yet a little progress in super-physical
knowledge, available now for all who will profit
by current revelation, invests the idea of the
Resurrection with poetical charm. The astral
body, which rises again in every case when a
discarded physical body melts away into its
constituent elements, is susceptible of a
wonderfully beautiful change. Leave the evildoers out of account for the moment - the very
bad cases have to be dealt with for a time in an
appropriate fashion - as regards the vast
majority of decently behaved people, even though
life may have dragged on till physical vehicle is
withered and destitute of all the graces of its
youth, the astral body, in which the Ego passes
away from it, soon undergoes a change the exact
reverse of growing old on the physical plane. The
old man or woman finds him or her self restored
in appearance to the aspect worn in whatever has
been the best period of the life concluded. All
who are in touch with the astral world - the
first super-physical aspect of the Earth - will
be familiar with such changes; which, moreover,
in the case of people who have, in the course of
a long life, far transcended the mental and
spiritual condition of what may have been
physically their best period, will somehow show
by new expression in that recovered best period
the mental and spiritual attributes imperfectly
developed during the Earth-life. It is sad to
think that multitudes of innocent people are
allowed by ignorant teachers to grovel with the
foulest misconception of a beautiful natural
truth, when they ought to be instructed in the
exquisite charm of the arrangements made by
natural law - in other words by Divine love - for

their happiness and welfare between successive
lives (as they ought to be) of strenuous effort
on the physical plane.
And that same idea spreads over the whole area of
conventional religious teaching. Creeds
incredible as they stand are matched by
theological doctrines that degrade the popular
understanding, even when refined away to some
extent by cultivated thinking, and represent the
Divine nature capable of an anger so ignoble that
it can be appeased by innocent bloodshed. The
sublime Christian story in this way gets itself
twisted into a shape in which it is offensive to
any lofty conception of the Divine nature. Must
the authorities of the Church go on ad infinitum,
afraid to attempt a drastic revision of the
language employed in its services, for fear lest
the whole ecclesiastical structure should fall in
ruins as a consequence? If that fear checks them,
the fact only shows how utterly they
misunderstand the drift of enlightened spiritual
teaching, available for all, now the veil has
been drawn aside from what was previously occult.
The wave of interest in that enlightenment is
sweeping all over the civilized world. And far
from making people hostile to the theory of an
established Church, it makes them think how
beautiful a condition of things would be realized
if the Church would become a true spiritual
University, representing the latest developments
of super-physical knowledge, studying the varied
conditions of life during and beyond physical
incarnation, the possibilities of attainment
inherent in humanity and the stupendous programme
of the Cosmos to which our system belongs. In all
lines of study with which intelligence can
engage, if the mysteries of Nature, progress is
obviously the bright lure of the future,
stagnation an absurdity. And yet stagnation in
thought is cherished as a principle by the
defenders of the cut-and-dried formulas of
medieval theology. Such defence can hardly be

designed to shield faith; its purpose can only be
to protect the institutions associated, to their
deep discredit, with the stagnant thought. It is
ridiculous almost beyond the reach of sarcasm
that professional religious teachers should be
the only kind who, parrot-like, repeat their
lessons unchanged from year to year - a senseless
articulation of sound - while out in the world
discovery and illuminated thought are widening
our intellectual horizons in every direction.
That clearing vision of spiritual truth which the
champions of stagnation cannot dim is really the
explanation of the strange way in which modern
civilization tolerates its clergy. All who profit
by the growth of spiritual knowledge feel that
this will assuredly, in the long run, permeate
the Church, and that, once emancipated from
medieval fetters, that organization may be
destined to a magnificent development. The trust
that this may be possible depends perhaps on a
far-sighted view of the future; but when in its
moral progress civilization deprived orthodoxy of
its torture chambers and the stake, a change set
in which may be slow, like the movement of a
glacier, but is as certain of effect, in the long
run, as the glacier flow, and will ultimately
turn the frozen ice into a dancing river,
sparkling in the sunshine.

IMPRISONED IN THE FIVE SENSES
THE "Palace of Art" was replete with interest and
charm for its mistress up to a certain stage in
her spiritual evolution; but a time came when she
found herself - though still in its luxurious
magnificence Shut up as in a crumbling tomb, girt round
With blackness as a solid wall.

An emotion loftier than the thirst for pleasure
constrained her to break away from its
limitations, and to "purge her guilt" in a wider
atmosphere of sympathy with her kind.
Tennyson's poetry is so full of meaning below the
surface that one is tempted to discern a deep
allegorical significance in the lines just quoted
over and above their obvious bearing on the plain
problems of human life - on selfishness and
sympathy. For all humanity at the present period
of its progress is shut in within the shining
walls of its gorgeous artistic and scientific
Palace, the contents sufficing amply for its
needs, as long as it is satisfied to ignore all
that lies beyond. The walls of the Palace are the
senses, inherent in the vehicles of life on the
physical plane. As long as they are our only
avenues to consciousness they are not windows
through which we gaze out into infinity, but dead
walls confining our survey of Nature's mysteries
to one aspect only of their manifold variety.
Human intelligence of the usual type is, in
truth, imprisoned in the five senses, although in
the front already stand a few who have developed
new senses which reveal the existence of worlds
beyond worlds in endless series, and, as turned
back on the past show modern civilization but
just emerging from conditions analogous to
childhood.

The character of the change achieved by those
illuminated by new senses may best be
comprehended by focussing imagination on the
condition of a person born without the most
important of the five - the sense of sight. He
hears from others of natural phenomena he cannot
himself cognize. Descriptions will not help him
to realize colour or light. He will not
understand what is meant by "seeing" things he
cannot touch. Then grant him by a miracle the
gift of sight, and picture in the mind the
complicated revelation that ensues. The sudden
endowment of an ordinary civilized man with
senses already possessed by some persons in the
vanguard of human progress would mean a
revelation of even greater significance than that
suggested in the case of the man born blind. The
liberation of consciousness from previous
limitations would be more thrilling in its effect
than any change that could take place within
those limitations. Human consciousness in its
nature is qualified to give scope to perceptions
all but infinite in their range. But with the
ordinary run of mankind any given volume of
consciousness incarnate in a human being can only
deal with the fruit of the familiar senses. Of
course faith and imagination seem to yield much
more, but are cramped by the familiar senses - as
shown by some ludicrous features of
anthropomorphic religion. For practical purposes
the senses are the channels through which we gain
knowledge. When we guess or speculate along other
channels, the mental conception of one generation
is apt to be thrown aside by the next, and the
history of Philosophy becomes an amusing cinema
film, that can hardly be called a kaleidoscope,
and there is not much beauty about it.
By far the most important discoveries which
reward the efforts of those who escape from the
imprisonment of the senses have to do with the
definite possibilities of spiritual progress

associated with enlightenment that may be
attained through new channels of perception. But
the laws and phenomena of Nature are not really
divided by the hard-and-fast frontiers that
sense-perceptions seem to define. Grant anyone
amongst us certain new senses, and he will not
merely be enabled to perceive new regions of
existence with appropriate scenery and
decorations, brimming over with life of many
kinds, but will find the familiar features of the
life around us all - those of the physical plane
- much more full of meaning than they seemed to
be previously. I will illustrate this statement
by describing a scientific research carried on
within the last few years by means of superphysical senses, and happily involving something
like a self-contained proof of its conclusions.
It began under my own guidance, when working with
a friend brilliantly endowed with super-physical
senses. I had found that, quite independently of
results they gave us in reference to higher
conditions of life beyond the change called
death, they were ultra-microscopic in their
character as applied to physical nature. Could
they be so applied as to enable my friend to see
an ultimate molecule of physical matter? The
magnitude of such molecules is so minute that
mathematical calculations with which, among
others, the great name Lord Kelvin is associated,
lead to the conclusion that thirty trillion
molecules of water are included in the volume of
a cubic centimetre. My friend undertook to try,
and I suggested a molecule of gold as the body to
be examined. My friend emerged from the condition
in which he could attempt to do this, declaring
that, although the molecules of gold could be
individually discerned, they were far too
complicated to be described. They each of them
consisted of an intricate combination of smaller
atoms clearly belonging to a finer order of
matter. This observation led me to suggest that
perhaps molecules of matter of less atomic weight

than gold would be more manageable, and we next
dealt with a molecule of hydrogen gas. This was
found to be composed of atoms like those of the
gold molecule, but relatively few in number. They
could be counted. They were eighteen in number,
grouped in a definite design and in rapid
movement. The rapidity of their movement did not
interfere with the counting, for reasons I need
not stop now to explain.
We then went on to examine a molecule of oxygen.
This was found to be more complicated, but still
within the reach of careful counting. The number
of minor atoms was 290 - a figure the
significance of which was at once seen to be
remarkable. Divided by 18 it gives us 16.1, a
close approximation to the recognized atomic
weight of oxygen. Atomic weights, on the usual
scale, are calculated on the principle of
reckoning the weight of an atom of hydrogen as
unity. The relative atomic weights of other
bodies are derived from calculations dependent on
their varied combinations, again in a way I need
not go into here, as that has to do with
commonplace chemistry. Was the ratio 18 to 290
operative in other cases? The atom of nitrogen
was examined and found to consist of 214 minor
atoms. That again gave the recognized atomic
weight when divided by 18. The result was
extremely suggestive, but did not yet constitute
proof that the law would run all through the
series of the so-called chemical elements.
Meanwhile the minor atoms claimed attention. They
were apparently the really ultimate form of
physical matter - atoms of ether, themselves
below the limits of sense-perception. Only when
in combined masses - if the expression can be
used in reference to masses so minute as the
atoms of the chemical elements - do they come
within those limits. Thus incidentally the
research I am describing brought out a new
discovery. The etheric atoms do enter into
combination in numbers less than 18, but then

they do not constitute any known physical bodies.
They are molecular varieties of ether, the atomic
ether being the kind that fills all space, the
molecular ethers being definitely aggregated
around the planets.
So far the research was carried out in the year
1895, and happily the results, including all that
I have described above, were published at the
time and are available for reference. Six years
later Mme. Curie discovered radium, and its
entrance on the scene revolutionized chemical
science in more ways than one. Study of the
cathode ray had already introduced us all to the
"electron" as an entity, but radium introduced us
to the idea that physical matter consisted of
electrons, and that transmutation was a
possibility in nature, thus vindicating the
alchemical theory of the Middle Ages which
nineteenth-century science had ridiculed. Inquiry
of the ordinary kind was now directed to the
questions, what is an electron? and how many
enter into the lightest known atom - that of
hydrogen? The clairvoyant research above
described had answered both of these questions in
advance, but was not thought worthy of notice by
scientists of the orthodox type. The electron
came to be treated as an atom of electricity by
some scientific leaders, though to others that
view was unacceptable. Electricity is a force,
not a form of matter. To speak of an atom of
electricity is like speaking of an atom of
gravitation, and that would be transparently
ridiculous. Occult research had shown from the
beginning that the electron, though itself an
atom of ether, carried a definite unit charge of
elecricity. Orthodox opinions as to the number of
electrons in an atom of hydrogen vary within very
wide limits. Some give us figures from 1 to 5;
some others guess by hundreds, and 700 is rather
a favourite estimate. The few of us who trusted
the clairvoyant research felt sure the real
number was 18. Then in a few years came the proof

of this, a proof again so far ignored by science
at large, though its ultimate recognition is
really a matter of certainty.
The research of 1895 was only resumed several
years later by my clairvoyant friend, assisted
then by another qualified observer. The task they
undertook was much more elaborate than the
former. Its purpose was to ascertain by actual
counting the number of etheric atoms entering
into composition of a large number of chemical
elements, also to depict the grouping of the
etheric atoms. The complexity of the grouping was
bewildering. Gold, for instance, consists of
three combined groups, an exact description of
which, unless illuminated by diagrams, would be
hardly intelligible. The important idea to
realize is that the counting could only be
effected by degrees, the etheric atoms in each
group reckoned up separately with the assistance
of a secretary who wrote down the figures as they
were called out, and only added them up after the
protracted observations were complete. The total
was 3,546. Then came the interesting question what figure would that yield divided by 18? The
answer is 197. The recognised atomic weight of
gold is 195.74. The deeply interesting principle
was vindicated and, as the protracted research
went on, over fifty of the recognised chemical
elements were examined, and in all cases the same
principle was found to be operative. I have a
table before me as I write, showing the figures
reached in 57 observations of elements
commonplace and rare; and the result is nothing
less than a demonstration of the accuracy of the
original observation showing the atom of hydrogen
to consist of 18 etheric atoms. The notion that
the counting can in any way have been made to fit
the theory is dissipated by the complication of
the work. Neither the observer nor the secretary
could have forseen how the figures given and
recorded by degrees would fit in with the theory
when added up. Eight of the observed elements

have over 3,000 atoms each; eight more have over
2,000. And an interesting hint supporting the
trustworthiness of the research is due to the
fact that the observers found in the atmosphere
two molecules that could not be identified with
any known element. Their electric atoms numbered
respectively 54 and 402, yielding the atomic
weights 3 and 22.33. Now in the course of Sir
J.J. Thomason's research (by ingenious electrical
methods) into the vagaries of the electron, he
found reason to believe and to announce that
there must be two unknown elements with atomic
weights of (about 3 and 22). He little realized
that the announcement vindicated a previous
announcement to the same effect giving similar
results attained by clairvoyant research.
But the 3 and 22 discovery was of insignificant
importance compared with the discovery of the
true meaning of atomic weights. No work done in
laboratories in connection with the electron or
radioactivity is of such far-reaching
significance as the atomic-weight discovery due
to the clairvoyant research. It shows us ether to
be ponderable matter, though in its uncombined
form it defies examination by methods appealing
to the physical senses. Optical methods tell us a
good deal about the ether, but are silent in
regard to its mechanical attributes. Clairvoyant
research is the only kind that can expand our
knowledge of Nature across the threshold of the
region which lies beyond mere laboratory
research.
In describing the work done so far by the
clairvoyant method as applied to certain problems
in chemistry, I have not stopped to give chapter
and verse in reference to the dates of magazines
or pamphlets issued from time to time and duly
recording results. In verifying what I have
written I will gladly assist any serious
scientific enquirer capable of appreciating the
simple truth that the research described is the

most important contribution to our comprehension
of physical chemistry that has been made within
any recent period.
And yet, striking as it is, it is among the least
important of the results attained by human
intelligence when once that breaks free from
imprisonment in the physical senses. The light
shed on the gradual development of the human race
by clairvoyant research illuminates evolution,
and the magnitude of the design, to an extent
that renders the earliest Egyptian and Chaldean
records modern history by comparison. Besides
being ultra-microscopic, clairvoyance of the
highest order is retrospective almost to
infinity. There is no mystery in the matter as
treated from one point of view. The duly
qualified clairvoyant can get into conscious
touch with the Memory of Nature, which is
infinite in its range. That is a great mystery,
no doubt, only to be interpreted by very lofty
wisdom; but without reaching to such levels the
clairvoyant who has but just broken out of prison
can share in the universal memory to a certain
extent. One of the best books (Samuel Laing's
Human Origins), written previously to recent
clairvoyant research, but dealing with the
evidence afforded by geological strata, pushes
back the presence of Man on earth to the Tertiary
period. But a few hundred thousand years
represent a mere fraction of the time since the
earth was first inhabited by humanity, and not
merely by humanity but by nations of advanced
civilization. The mists that hung at first over
traditions of Atlantis are now clearing up.
Incredulity, scoffing at Plato's story, gave way
at last to the soundings of the Challenger. The
Atlantic bed confessed part of the truth.
Geologists accepted the information and, having
left off laughing at the idea, proceeded to
indicate the exact region in which the last
surviving remnant of the original Atlantic
continent lies now under water. But it was not

the business of the Challenger or the geologist
to describe the inhabitants of either the last
remant or the great original continent. That was
accomplished by clairvoyant research and the
results were duly published, years in advance of
one occasion I remember when a map of the
Atlantic bed was exhibited at a conversazione of
the Royal Society, showing "Poseidonis" (the last
piece of the former continent submerged 9000-odd
years B.C.) lying under the waves of the present
ocean. Recorded evidence concerning the character
and date of the great catastrophe has been
derived from the hieroglyphics of Mexico and
Yucatan, and fuller information on the subject
has been obtained - in another way. The few among
us qualified to carry on super-physical research
are enabled, by virtue of their abnormally
developed senses, to get in touch with still more
abnormally developed Beings whose progress,
though they have emerged originally from
humanity, has so far engaged them in work on
higher planes of nature that they are lost to
sight as regards ordinary mankind. But they have
attained to loftier conditions of existence
without losing their sympathy with humanity of
the ordinary type. To do full justice to the idea
would mean re-writing books devoted to the
subject, but for the moment it should be enough
to feel that the influences making for variety in
human life - that show us an ascending scale
beginning with the savage and culminating in the
great Masters of science, literature, and art,
are not likely to stop abruptly even at those
levels. Its higher progress may stretch beyond
commonplace vision, as the ultra-violet rays of
the spectrum are beyond such vision, but we can
gain certain assurance that ultra-violet rays
exist in Nature, and that those who may be
described as Masters of Wisdom and Knowledge
exist also.
Thus clairvoyant research and information
combined enable us to trace the origin and

progress of Atlantean civilization through
periods in the past to be counted not in
thousands but in millions of years. And behind
them again back into other millions during which
the human form, as we know it, was gradually
developed from lower forms. Indeed, if we go far
enough back we shall find life, which from some
points of view we may call already human,
functioning in vehicles of consciousness not yet
entirely physical. But leaving that part of the
story out of account, the information already
accumulated concerning the Atlantean races shows
conventional speculation relating to anthropology
and ethnology to be mere groping in the dark.
Clairvoyant observation gives us a clear-daylight
comprehension of the actual facts. Commonplace
thinking on these subjects is entangled with
phrases that are utterly misleading - the stone,
bronze, and iron ages; the neolithic and the
paleolithic periods. Flint implements, of course,
have their story to tell. They show that regions
of the world where they are found, at dates
vaguely suggested by geology, were inhabited by
men of a very primitive type. Very likely. At
early Atlantean periods before civilization had
developed, migrations of early sub-races of
Atlanteans spread all over the world. They slowly
outgrew early conditions without sharing the
stimulating influences operative in the
evolutionary vortex from which they had been
thrown off. Concurrently with a stone age in some
fragments of land emerging from the sea in the
region we now call Europe, an age of advanced
science, of stupendous engineering achievements,
of intricate sociology was in full activity in
the West. As the geography of the world was
shaped anew in some Eastern countries immense
progress was accomplished there. In Human Origins
Mr. Laing is impressive concerning the certainty
that high civilization prevailed in Egypt long
before Menes - or the 7000-odd years of Egyptian
history. Certainly it prevailed for hundreds of
thousands of years before then, the direct gift

of Atlantean civilization previous to its
decline.
Perhaps, however, the most deeply interesting
aspect of the whole Atlantean story has to do
with the moral changes that have gone on in the
world since that strange period in which the
decline becomes manifest. In their intellectual
perfection the Atlanteans in some ways were
farther on than ourselves. They controlled some
forces of nature we have not yet got commmand of,
and they were past-masters in the arts of
metallic transmutation, which, as a theoretical
possibility, our chemists have only just
discerned. But they had not even got a glimpse of
the moral beauty of unselfishness, care for the
welfare of others, love, in any of its loftier
aspects. Altruism, philanthropy, would have been
ideas for which their language furnished no
equivalent expression.
Thus we gain a comprehension of human progress on
the large scale as a series of spiral cycles, in
the course of which we return to previous
conditions, but on a higher level. Modern
civilization is now returning to a stage in
intellectual progress reached by the Atlanteans
at remote periods in the past, but with certain
very important embellishments. Aviation and
transmutation, now beginning to engage our
attention, were, as already said, Atlantean
achievements; but we must resume acquaintance
with them, plus moral progress, in which Atlantis
was sadly deficient.
The limitations of sense, besides obscuring the
past, veil the prospects of the future. Once they
are broken through, the Divine plan of human
evolution stretches out before us on a scale of
startling magnificence. Clairvoyance of the
higher order introduces us, as already explained,
to those advanced leaders of our race described
above as Masters of Wisdom and Knowledge. We are

enabled to recognize them as linking ordinary
humanity with the Divine Hierarchy. This extends
upwards to infinity, but we touch a sublime truth
in realizing that on what may be called (though
only by comparison) its lower levels, it is
recruited from ordinary humanity. The prettiest
among conventional conceptions of the after-life
show us no more than happy conditions of superphysical existence, dignified no doubt by the
actual recogniton of Divinity. But such beatitude
seems, regarded by ordinary religious teaching,
as a finality. Clearer vision shows the spiritual
future as infinitely progressive, and the sublime
conditions attained by Masters of Wisdom merely a
stage of progress: a stage which the majority of
the human race ought to attain in the long run,
though the length of that run is all but beyond
the reach of imagination. As some have attained
it already, many more may do so in the future,
greatly in advance of its attainment by the
majority. The conditions of such relatively rapid
progress are the principal subjects of study for
pupils of the higher occultism. Incidentally in
connection with that study light is let in on
many regions of scientific research besides those
to which allusion has already been made.
Emerging from the entirely primitive or childish
view of the Sun and Moon and starry heavens as
designed merely to light up the earth,
commonplace modern speculation assigns
inhabitants to some, at all events, of the
planets. And the stars are known to Astronomy as
Suns, probably with families of planets in each
case. That knowledge can be reached by simple
intelligence working with the results of
observation carried out on within the limits of
normal sense-perception. The methods of
observation available for the advanced leaders of
our race put them in touch with a new kind of
astronomy that may be called "Vital," as
distinguished from the mechanical astronomy which
deals only with magnitude and motion. Mechanical

astronomy is as different from the Vital as a
mere geography book, just defining the boundaries
of the various countries, would differ from
exhaustive accounts of the people inhabiting
each, their manners, customs, arts and sciences,
their political organizations and their
sociology. Physical observation has shown that
Mars must be inhabited by intelligent and
competent beings, their huge artificial works
proving this - in spite of tenacious incredulity
clinging in the case of a few astronomers to the
idea that the Lowell's Canals are the offspring
of chance. Vital Astronomy enables us to
understand that the inhabitants of Mars are
linked in evolution with ourselves, the
inhabitants of this Earth, but at an earlier
stage of progress. The various planets of the
Solar System are not disconnected from one
another in their design and destinies, as they
seem disconnected in space. On higher planes of
manifestation - regions of which the imprisoning
senses give us no hint - the immortal units of
humanity, the conscious Egos, migrate at
stupendous intervals of time from some globes to
some others. The plan in detail is much more
elaborate than this rough sketch would suggest,
but it has the intellectual charm of showing the
whole system to be one coherent organism. The
planet Mercury is also blended as regards its
vital purpose with the human life of the Earth,
while already the human life of the planet Venus
has attained to far loftier conditions than we
here have reached as yet - is, in fact, a senior
evolution as compared with our own, and one in
which humanity is set entirely free from the
limitations of the physical senses. If anyone
mentally still imprisoned in these objects to
this statement on the ground that proximity to
the Sun must make Venus and Mercury very hot, the
answer is that while Nature has adapted flesh and
blood to suit (with more or less success) the
climatic conditions of the Earth, it is quite
equal to the task of providing vehicles of

consciousness for climates above our boilingpoint, that can breathe comfortably in an
atmosphere at the temperature of super-heated
steam. Chemistry has still some discoveries to
make, and the composition of liquids that provide
Mercury, for instance, with lakes and rivers
defying evaporation at, say, 300º F. would be very
interesting if it could be ascertained. But less
so after all than the contemplation, possible for
our prison-breakers, of the delightful conditions
of harmony and peace which are the keynotes of
existence on Mercury, and in greater degree still
on Venus.
The hints I have given so far of the way in which
senses - avenues of consciousness - superior to
those we are most of us used to, enlarge our
comprehension of Nature, will naturally suggest
the inquiry how they affect our comprehension of
the conditions each of us encounters when we pass
through the change called death. The answer is
simple. They make the change perfectly
intelligible; they render the region of existence
into which we shall pass after undergoing the
change a pays de connaissance. That is the
foremost discovery with which they are concerned.
Current discussion as to whether we really do
live again - a possibility rendered doubtful for
many people because religious teachers seem to
know so little about it - is sadly ludicrous in
view of the certain knowledge on the subject
lying ready for us only just outside our prison
doors. People, indeed, still within them are
already inexcusable if they doubt the main
principle, for abundant information has been
smuggled through to them, and telephones - so to
speak - have been set up within the prison walls
which enable us to talk with people outside. But
one must go outside fully to understand what lies
beyond. Dartmoor is big, but England is bigger,
and beyond England lie other countries of
stupendous magnitude. The physical plane is an
extensive region, but regions within the

cognizance of superior senses are more extensive
in more than a corresponding fashion. Our astral
world into which we pass when escaping from the
prison of the senses is an envelope surrounding
the physical globe, but enormous in comparison.
To the appropriate senses it is as solid and
variegated as this. And there are numberless
variations of condition for dwellers in the vast
astral globe. The Earth-life has been used by
some in a manner productive as its consequence of
great happiness and wide views of Nature - by
others unhappily in ways that entail consequences
of a very different order, with which people who
lead commonly decent lives need not trouble their
imagination; unless, indeed, without any selfregarding apprehension, they want to understand
the sublime harmonies of a Divine design which
would be violated disastrously if the ulterior
results of good and bad lives were uniformly the
same. Thus the astral world provides purgatorial
conditions of highly varying intensity, through
which those who have badly misused the
opportunities of physical life must pass before
attaining happier conditions, while, for a very
large number of people who have led fairly
creditable lives, the happy conditions are
reached at once. The study of the way in which
these vary in turn - meeting the needs of the
simply innocent immigrants as appropriately as
they provide for highly evolved entities - the
foremost representatives of earthly wisdom and
achievement - is a profoundly interesting but a
very elaborate study, to subserve which, however,
abundant literature is now in existence.
This, moreover, will enable anyone who wishes to
push the inquiry farther to gather some
information as to the way in which the five
senses may be reinforced by the development of
new ones. In an imperfectly developed condition
there are two organs in the human brain which,
when fully matured, will respond to the higher
vibrations of certain media in which we are

unconsciously immersed, and convey impressions to
the brain as vivid as those conveyed by the eye
when dealing with objects normally visible. These
organs are the Pineal Gland and the Pituitary
body. In some few cases they are already active;
in some others they might be cultivated into
activity; in the vast majority of cases they are
hopelessly incapable of such development during
the current life of the Ego concerned. Their
development in the next physical life depends on
the extent to which, in the current life, the
person in question devotes thought, study, and
effort to super-physical aspiration, for the laws
governing the growth of form recognize thought
and effort as potent forces contributing to the
result.
Indeed, if we cling to the prison metaphor the
situation is abnormal in more ways than one, for
the authorities are by no means anxious to keep
their prisoners within their respective cells.
They must - in obedience to still higher
authority - refrain from actually helping
prisoners to escape, but they do not interfere
with those trying to do so. Prison-breaking, far
from being an offence, is their right - is
regarded as altogether meritorious. Once clear of
the walls the fugitive is never pursued or
brought back. Authority wishes him well, and
cheers him farther progress. He must, however,
break out by daring and force, not by cunning.
There is a door leading out of the prison into
the free world beyond that is always unfastened.
Any prisoner can push it open and go out that way
if he chooses, but all are put upon their honour
not to attempt an escape that way. And if they
break faith and do so, they are terribly
disappointed, for the door leads out of the
prison, it is true, but to regions in which the
conditions are still more distressing than those
of the prison itself, and there is no short cut
leading out of them in turn. To plod through the
forbidden country may take a longer time than

would have been spent in the prison waiting for
the order of release, due in any case sooner or
later.
Nor must it be imagined that the period spent in
prison is wasted time. Physical life is, indeed,
subject to limitations trying to the patience of
those who know something about the infinite
realities that lie beyond, but the law of all
progress defines the physical plane as the region
of Beginnings. No one word precisely fits the
idea; nor does it apply to the beginnings of
Form. Divine Ideation, Creative Thought, takes
its rise on much higher planes, but culminates on
the Physical. There, individualized
consciousness, human Egos - working in forms
completed from one point of view, though very far
from perfection as contemplated from another can start on an upward journey. From that time
on, their progress depends on themselves. They
are launched on the upward arc of evolution and
all the limitations accumulated during the
downward arc fall away, or rather are shaken off
as the onward progress is accomplished. The work
of shaking them off is difficult in the
beginning. Most people are imperfectly aware of
the disabilities under which they labour. The
senses have given them a rich and apparently
ever-growing store of knowledge and power. They
are - the foremost of them - proud and content within their Palace. The multitude have not even
risen to the appreciation of its opulent
resources. None the less, the Beginning, for
every single Ego of the countless millions, must
be made from the physical point of departure. And
on the physical plane - the prison of my
favourite metaphor - the countless millions will
accumulate and remain until they make it. In that
fact lies the clue to the course that has been
pursued in recent years by agents of the Divine
Hierarchy who have guided the current outburst of
information relating to the higher destinies
available for mankind, information which

constitutes a feature of ever-increasing
importance in modern civilization. The steps
taken were impossible at a former time. Bigotry
dominated the mental atmosphere. Ignorant power
stamped upon all manifestation of independent
thought. It was only when freedom had "broadened
slowly from precedent to precedent" that a place
was found among men for messengers from a loftier
world. Now the message has been poured forth
through many channels. In varying forms of
expression it is the same in all cases. Look
beyond the perishable interests of transient life
in the physical body. Comprehend the scheme of
infinite magnificence to which you belong. Get
the clear view now attainable of the whole Divine
programme. Make the beginning that every human
creature must make soon or late, and the results
are bound to transcend even the most glowing
anticipation.

OUR VISITS TO THIS WORLD
THE materialist who regards human life as
beginning in the cradle and ending in the grave
is at all events consistent, though he insults
Divine intelligence. But people who shrink from
believing in final extinction, and nevertheless
regard each new life as a fresh beginning insult
human understanding. They ask us, in other words,
to accept the idea of a stick with only one end.
We can think of a stick with no ends at all, or
anyhow can talk of it as we talk of Eternity, but
to be on speaking terms with Infinitude we must
avoid the acquaintance of futurities that have no
past. Some phenomena - a bonfire, for instance may begin and cease to be, but human immortality
is an idea that claims in the forward direction
to share the attributes of Duration, and cannot
do without them in the other.
The word "life" needs to be handled with care. If
people go on living after their bodies are buried
or burned, their presence on the physical plane
is merely an episode in their lives. If these
continue they must, under other conditions, have
been going on before on other planes. Seventy or
eighty years of activity in the physical body
constitute part of a life. Its continuance has
ceased to be a matter of guesswork for the
millions concerned with the simple variety of
occult research described as Spiritualism, and
the current interest in that research is rapidly
rendering the current contempt for it in most
newspapers an illustration of their patient
efforts to represent the greatest stupidity of
the greatest number. A deeper research than that
content with merely proving that people are still
alive after they are "dead" introduces us to the
logical conclusion that they were alive before
they were born, and thus, by stages, to the
inevitable conclusion that consciousness
functioning sometimes on the plane of Nature,
sometimes on another, is never "to one engine

bound," but always cycles round and round. In
hard scientific language this conclusion brings
us up against the doctrine of Reincarnation,
which, sharing the fate of many others, is made
to seem an offence to lofty aspiration by getting
itself profoundly misunderstood.
At first, introduced to the Western world in the
earliest theosophical writings, it captured a
great array of supporters because, for the first
time, it enabled them to contemplate the
inequalites of human condition without feeling
that they were incompatible with belief in Divine
justice. Once could fall back on the theory that
Divine ways were inscrutable, but it was
comforting to grasp a new idea that prevented
them from seeming, on the face of things, ways we
should personally be ashamed of. Objections were
forthcoming none the less. Spiritualists said our
friends on the other side do not know anything
about the new idea. Others declared that they did
not like this world, and did not want to come
back to it, confident that Nature would not be so
rude as to disregard their wishes. To others,
again, the notion of beginning life afresh at the
perambulator stage was intolerable; and
affectionate parents, mourning a loved daughter,
were horrified to think that on passing on
themselves they might be greeted with the news
that she had been reincarnated in Timbuctoo. From
another point of view the disbeliever declared
that he did not remember having had a previous
life, therefore it was obvious that neither he
nor anyone else ever had done. Objections of
these varied kinds are very amusing to all who
understand more or less completely the conditions
of human progress through the ages. The friends
of the Spiritualist on "the other side" are
enjoying the freshness of renewed life, the
reunion with others they may have cared for, the
vivid reality of that next world they have
reached; they are no more concerned with further
changes that may lie in the remote future than

boys at a school, full of enthusiasm for cricket,
ponder on problems that perplex the invalid of
sixty or seventy. Nor if they did develop a
premature interest in the remote future could
they readily get information. If they have it in
them to advance to higher levels of the Astral
world, beyond that they touch on first going
over, they will ultimately acquire knowledge; but
even that is not certain unless they have been
tinged during physical life with some aspiration
towards higher knowledge.
A fundamental and deeply important fact connected
with higher spiritual progress is hinted at by
what has just been said. The physical plane of
life is pre-eminently associated with all
beginnings. Its importance in this respect cannot
be overrated. This condition underlies the
principle of Reincarnation, is the root of its
necessity. Spiritualism and other forms of belief
concerning the future life include a vague
expectation that infinite spiritual progress is
possible after death down here. So it is, but the
permanent Ego is not spoon-fed with higher
knowledge unless he has engendered a desire for
it in his working period on the physical plane.
If he has not done this Nature gives him such
blissful rest on higher levels of consciousness
as he may be entitled to by the use he has made
of his physical opportunities, and then another
set of opportunities in the shape of renewed
physical life. Of course, there are other
purposes to be served by that renewed life to be
discussed later on, but for the moment, in
reference to the first steps in our comprehension
of loftier destinies, Reincarnation may be
thought of as the system or method adopted by
Nature for teaching the law of Reincarnation. At
earlier stages of human progress the young Ego
has not begun to concern itself with the study of
natural law - is merely gathering, life after
life, preliminary experience of pleasure and
pain, of right and wrong, of emotion and desire

and their consequences. Does the use of the word
"young" in this sense seem to involve the fallacy
of assigining a beginning to that which has no
end? There is no real inconsistency in the
language used. The essence of the young Ego has
emerged from infinite Divine life, but at one
period has crystallized as a centre of
consciousness within the Divine life, and in
conformity with laws coming to be understood
develops expanded capacity by degrees. Gradually
and slowly this result is accomplished.
Man as yet is being made and ere the crowning Age of
ages,
Shall not æon after æon pass and touch him into shape?

But his consciousness may be traced back through
animal and vegetable forms, through solar systems
and nebulæ to past infinitudes of manifestation.
Perhaps a simpler answer than has been given
above might more easily meet the objection of
spiritualists who say that their spirit friends
do not know anything of Reincarnation. Some of
them do! But the fact that some of them deny it
is quite intelligible when we comprehend their
limitations, and unimportant. For most of us
belief in the rotundity of the Earth is not
shaken by the denial of a few who still believe
it to be flat.
When disbelief in the law of Reincarnation arises
from dislike for the idea, one may first of all
suggest that people who deeply dislike the law
which brings trouble on those who pick other
people's pockets do not by such dislike divert
its course. But in truth, people only dislike the
idea for want of understanding it. They do not
realize, for one thing, that the force which
gives rise to Reincarnation in each individual
case is a desire on the part of the Ego to
reincarnate. If no such desire were generated, on

the plane of the Ego, after the personal life of
the entity in question has been fully enjoyed or
worked out in the Astral world, and then has
merged itself in the Ego on a higher plane,
Reincarnation would not take place; but the
hypothesis for the occultist is unthinkable. The
desire for such experience is as inevitably
engendered in the Ego when all so far gathered
has been absorbed, as the desire for fresh food
is engendered during physical life in the body,
when previous supplies have been finally disposed
of. This state of things invests the familiar
protest against having to come back to this vale
of tears with a very ludicrous aspect. Even after
eating too much and being for the moment
disinclined for more food, people in general know
that at some future time they will be hungry
again; but, if while suffering from repletion
they declared that for ever and ever they would
detest food, the declaration would be
unconvincing. The advanced Ego knows that he must
come back to life on Earth in order eventually to
get on. Certainly, by some, a god-like stage is
reached when an Ego may have risen above the laws
affecting ordinary humanity, but long before then
his lives in connection with the Earth will have
included complete comprehension of all such laws.
People who criticize them on the basis of
profound ignorance of the way they work have
certainly not attained the condition which might
enable them to be a law unto themselves.
Of all the misconceptions prompting disbelief in
Reincarnation, the most ridiculous is that which
makes some critics shrink with horror from the
idea of beginning life again in the cradle. They
somehow imagine themselves with their present
elaborate consciousness subject to its miserable
limitations. The law does not give rise to any
such ghastly absurdity, but to get rid entirely
of the painful delusion in question we have to go
into a closer study of the way the process of
rebirth is effected than was usually possible for

those who accepted the main idea at the first
blush, as accounting for the inequalities of
life.
The method Nature pursues in providing an Ego
with a fresh incarnation shows the absurdity of
what may be called the perambulator objection.
When - long after the close of the Earth period
of the previous life - the time has come for the
Ego to plunge again into the experiences of the
physical plane, the preparations for this are
very gradual. And they vary within a very wide
range of possibility according to the stage of
growth the Ego has reached. But in any case the
child in its baby stage is not an embodiment of
the Ego, or of the last personality in which it
manifested, any more than the sloppy clay
foundations of a new house are already inhabited
by the person who is destined to live in it when
it is fully built and furnished. The
amplification of this all-important view of the
matter may be postponed for the moment, for the
broad fact disposes of the delusion people suffer
from if they think of themselves as enduring the
limitations of childhood when coming back to
Earth-life. Before dealing fully with the gradual
way in which a new child's body is rendered fit
for occupation by the appointed tenant, attention
may as well be paid to a difficulty of a more
dignified order than any already noticed. Does
the law of Reincarnation conflict with the
supremely important aspect of the next world, in
which we think of it as reuniting under happy
conditions the loving friends, wives and
daughters, sons and fathers, torn asunder by
death - so cruelly torn asunder as it often seems
to limited vision. Reincarnation no more
interferes with the reunion on higher planes of
those who have loved one another on this one than
our next summer's holiday will be interfered with
by the precession of the equinoxes. That
astronomical process will affect climate in
future, but it need not worry us for the moment.

Nor, indeed, as regards the law of Reincarnation
need the most far-sighted view of the future
embarrass the conditions - on the Astral plane of those who have loved one another on Earth. On
the contrary it expands to infinitude the value
of that relationship. Other natural conditions
operate at first in the Astral life, and no
matter what intervals of our time elapse between
the passing over of the persons concerned,
experience of Astral life shows that the old look
of an old-age body - reflecting itself for a
brief period in the Astral form - rapidly
disappears. As a broad rule people all grow young
again in appearance, after passing over in old
age, or revert to whatever they may think of as
the prime of life, the aspect best worthy of
perpetuation. The few years that for a time
separate the person who dies first from the
beloved other who lingers long in physical life,
fade into insignificance in the long
companionship of the Astral life. Then eventually
(after certain developments on higher levels),
those who really care for one another reincarnate
more or less simultaneously, and come into
renewed relationships or intimacies on the Earth
plane. To quarrel with the law of Reincarnation,
because it separates people who can only be happy
together, is a blunder for which it is difficult
to imagine a parallel. One might as well complain
of the Sun for not shining, or of the Earth for
not turning round. Reincarnation is a force that
does not disperse people, but gathers them
together. It does this not merely as regards
loving couples: it unites great groups of people
in sympathetic friendship. Whenever exceptional
opportunities have enabled occult students to
gain knowledge concerning the former lives of
themselves and their friends or belonings,
current intimacies are always found to be the
fruit of similar relationships in former times.
Where some man and woman are found united in this
life by the beautiful bond of a real mutual love,
they are invariably found to have been man and

wife in repeated lives for thousands of years.
And community of interest in devotion to
spiritual progress links large groups of people
together in life after life. Through the ages
they may scatter sometimes, when individual
attractions draw them off in one direction or
another. They always come together again sooner
or later.
In view of what has just been said it is hardly
necessary to deal seriously with the selfsufficient foolishness of people who contend
that, because they do not remember any former
life, no one has lived formerly. Many people do
remember, as one result of awakening faculties
not yet common to all, and the fact that the vast
majority do not remember is easily accounted for.
The human race, as a whole, is not far enough
advanced to work with the senses that have been
brought into activity by a few pioneers of
progress. The cultured minority of civilized
countries, even, is little more than half-way on
along the course marked out for the millions of
years of human activity, while, if we strike an
average between an Australian savage and the
President of the Royal Society, the result will
be rather disheartening. And, indeed, though we
may take the holder, at any time, of the exalted
office referred to as one who "stands on the
height of his life," and of life as generally
understood, the occult student at all events
enjoys "a glimpse of a height that is higher,"
and expands his consciousness accordingly. But
apart, indeed, from the fact that the majority
even of cultured people in civilized communities
have not yet developed faculties that enable them
to remember past lives, there is a very good
reason why Nature does not allow them to do so,
at their present stage of progress. Very often
they have complicated "Karma" to work out. They
have done things in past lives that entail
painful consequences in the current life. To be
able in advance, by remembering the incidents, to

foresee the painful consequences impending, would
be an arrangement cruelly aggravating the pain.
For the clear sight of past causes it is much
better that most of us should wait. When
spiritual attainment has cured us of the
tendencies that engender evil consequences; when
appropriate aspirations and acquired knowledge
co-operate, the higher senses (which include the
power of looking back) will certainly dawn among
earnest students of the Higher Occultism - the
super-physical science of Nature which
illuminates the whole Divine scheme for those who
devoted it. There are some who already have these
higher senses in full activity, and can not only
look back on the former lives they themselves
have passed through, but on the companionships
and acquaintanceships of these lives, so that a
great many others now in physical life are
enabled at second hand to acquire knowledge of
their former doings. Thus we can observe in
actual operation the working of the law referred
to above, which brings sympathetic friends,
besides those linked by the supreme tie of love,
into incarnation together. In this way I have
been able to identify twenty or thirty of my
present friends and acquaintances, as having
played parts together in former dramas - parts
that have curiously varied in character
sometimes, under Karmic influences of diverse
kinds.
Before examining the method - or methods, for
they vary - by means of which reincarnations are
accomplished, let us glance at the esoteric
necessity for the process. Theologians, by
thoroughly misunderstanding God and Nature i.e., supreme Divine power and the mechanism of
manifestation - have taught people to think of
the Earth-life and its conditions with disdain
(if they can), and to contemplate an eternal
future of hymns, wings and inferior musical
instruments with as much ardour as the prospect
permits. Expanding knowledge enables us to

realize that the Earth-life is in the same
relation to the spiritual future that (during
this life) a man's business or work is to the
enjoyments that wait upon success. The slow
processes of early evolution fit the growing Ego
for his work in the Earth-life. Then he has to do
it, and earn the results. Few Egos would do it
successfully the first time of trying. Nature is
very patient, and gives them almost any number of
repeated opportunities for trying again - i.e.,
so many Earth-lives with periods of rest between
each. Only here can they do the work. Careless
thinkers vaguely imagine that spiritual progress
- without work to provide for it - will be
somehow accomplished on spiritual planes after
the shackles of physical existence are
contemptuously cast off. On this plane that would
be like the view of life that a man of business
might take if he assumed that income would flow
in of itself if he basked all the time in the
luxuries of his home and never went back to his
office. Consequences will not follow without
causes being set up to provide for them. That
simple truth governs spiritual progress as well
as the processes of manufacture. Wood will not
spontaneously convert itself into tables and
chairs. The human soul must be fashioned into
shape before it can take a place - as it may do
if all goes well - in the Divine Hierarchy; but,
unlike the wood, it has within it the power of
fashioning itself, and no external carpenter can
accomplish the task, a long and sometimes
wearisome undertaking that can only be carried to
a successful conclusion in the workshop. In more
scientific language, physical life is the
condition in which we all begin the work of
educating ourselves up to Divine levels, a
stupendous task, each stage of which has its own
beginning. We start in some life or another on
the upward journey. We make some progress which
colours the super-physical period of rest and
fruition, and if we persevere we get on farther
next time. No one in one physical life does more

than make progress. If he has set out to walk
from the Land's End to the north of Scotland he
cannot get over the whole distance in one day,
but let him keep on day after day and he will
arrive eventually. If he were allowed only one
day for the journey he would not do this. The
comparison is perfectly sound. If we were allowed
only one life, we could never get to the summit
of our possible destiny. Certainly there are
aspects of progress at variance apparently with
the rigidity of the statement above about the
necessity of providing for it by work down here.
At given stages of progress we must be in touch
with super-physical planes, but the aspiration to
get in touch with them must have begun here in
the first instance. Thus the importance of the
physical life and its opportunities cannot be
overrated, its frequent renewal is an absolute
necessity - deeply embedded, so to speak, in the
Divine programme of human evolution.
The methods by which reincarnations are
accomplished vary within very wide limits
according to the stage of development each Ego
may have reached. For a few (relatively), very
far on, special arrangements come into play.
Dealing first with the enormous majority,
including the savage and the civilized races, the
course of rebirth is guided - not by blind laws
inherent in matter, but by the will of Beings on
an immensely high level of Divine dignity,
thought of by occult students as the Lords of
Karma. So far as we know their collective
jurisdiction extends over the whole Universe. As
regards this world we know of four such Beings,
each, of course, presiding over an immense
hierarchy of agents. One is concerned merely - or
especially - with the savage races; another with
the rank and file of civilization; another with
the cultured minority: these present Karmic
problems of deeper intricacy than are usual with
the less evolved majority. The fourth is
concerned with the Karma of Nations, but that is

a huge subject by itself which need not claim
attention for the moment.
The simplest savage has potentialities of
ultimate development towards infinity, but till
his Ego has become qualified for incarnation in
civilized races, almost any opportunity for
renewed life in his own or some similar race will
suit him equally well. His higher spiritual self
is merely a germ. The identity of his
personalities in each savage life could only be
traced by the keenest vision of exalted
clairvoyance. As a natural process the method of
bringing any Ego back to physical life will be
better understood if we consider the rank and
file of civilization. At that level each Ego has
made some progress in growing a Higher Self on
the plane of spiritual consciousness. The
personality in life has developed capacities of
the mind, loves, friendships, and relationships
which give rise to a protracted and interesting
period of life on the Astral plane after physical
death. This period may last for centuries, but it
is the outcome of finite causes and comes to an
end. The loves and friendships do not come to an
end. They are simply melting into spiritual
consciousness preparatory to their renewal in a
new physical-plane act of the great life drama,
but when each Ego concerned has been assigned to
a new and appropriate incarnation by the Divine
discernment of the Lord of Karma, let us observe
what happens.
An atom of matter - inconceivably minute, an atom
of each plane on which human consciousness can
in function - clings to each personality after
death. This is well understood by occult
students. Such atoms are called the "permanent
atoms." They pass upward during the long interincarnate period, and ultimately lodge in the
Higher Self. When a new birth has been ordained
they are projected down through the intervening
planes, and the permanent physical atom lodges in

the new mother. Does that seem a very feeble link
with the last life on earth of the Ego concerned?
If we want to understand super-physical science,
we must get utterly rid of the habit of attaching
importance to magnitude. An atom may put a new
personality in touch with every event in the life
it was identified with a thousand years
previously. But we need not here plunge into a
discussion of the mysteries connected with
Nature's memory.
If we now turn to the case of an Ego belonging to
the cultured minority of civilized races, the
Higher Self, by the hypothesis, is more fully
grown. Something more than in the other case
clings to the permanent atoms, with the result
that the astral permanent atom gathers round it
(or is provided by the agents of Karma with) a
temporary vehicle of astral consciousness, which
strengthens the connection of the new child's
body with the Ego's last personality. Let no one
imagine that the new body becomes all at once a
vehicle of Ego-consciousness. For the first seven
years of its life, the baby consciousness does
not borrow from the presiding Astral any streak
even of its mature capacity for thought and
emotion. Nor even in the first seven years does
it do more than accomplish (under guidance)
certain preliminary processes of growth. Only
when another septenary period has passed does the
child, at fourteen, begin to be as regards its
astral nature the personality of the former life
over again, and not until a third septenary
period has passed is it infused with the
mentality of the former life. Then the Ego has
been reincarnated, except for what remains on
higher spiritual levels as the Higher Self. For
remember, we are now dealing with the case of an
entity so far advanced as necessarily to have
developed through many former lives a complicated
account with Karma. There are good and evil
forces awaiting operation. Capacities of various
kinds need expression. It may not be possible for

the directing Powers to find an incarnation in
which all these forces can operate
simultaneously. Successive lives, surrounded with
very different circumstances, may be required to
work out the whole intricate problem. But the
great Powers of Nature are very patient, and have
limitless time at their disposal. A large draft
upon these resources must be made when, in
addition to the intricate claims of an advanced
Ego's individual Karma, his love ties and hostile
relationships with other Egos have to be provided
for. But the manner in which Nature - the living
mechanism of Divine Will - exhibits a power of
combining everything with everything else, is for
a thoughtful observer the most dazzling of her
marvellous attributes.
The familiar phenomena of heredity illustrate
that last remark. When a child growing up
exhibits characteristics resembling those of
parents or ancestors, he is sometimes regarded as
supporting the idea that he is mentally and
morally, as well as physically, the product of
his parentage - a new soul. In reality the Powers
guiding his incarnation have put him into a
family the physical heredity of which will
provide him with a body capable of giving
expression to his individual characteristics.
They have been able to combine that provision
with a life-destiny in which his Karma can be
properly worked out.
Let us now consider the peculiar conditions
affecting the reincarnation of people well
advanced along that "Path" of abnormal spiritual
progress, leading to initiation into levels of
the Divine Hierarchy which the occult student
refers to when speaking of "The Masters" of
Wisdom and Power. At a certain stage of such
progress the Disciple, in fully conscious touch
on higher planes with his own particular Master,
is allowed by the Lords of Karma, to pass, in a
certain sense, out of their hands and to be

guided by the Master himself into his next
incarnation. By the hypothesis in such a case
there has not necessarily been any exhaustion of
the forces providing for long terms of happy rest
on the Astral and Manasic planes. The Disciple is
willing to forgo such spiritual enjoyments for
the sake of getting on, returning sooner than he
is obliged to the working condition of physical
existence. The Master finds an appropriate
opportunity for his rebirth in a family the
circumstances of which will fit him all round,
provide him by its physical heredity with a brain
qualified to express his intellectual or artistic
developments, and at the same time involve him in
conditions favourable to his further spiritual
progress. And the Disciple is definitely
consulted in regard to the choice. Probably two
or three possible incarnations are taken into
consideration, and the Disciple, we may be sure,
in such cases, is not guided in his choice by
what a mere worldly observer would regard as the
relatively attractive prospect offered by such
alternatives. Luxury, comfort even, in physical
life is regarded from the point of view at which
the Disciple is standing, in consultation with
his Master, as simply of no account. The question
is - which proposed life will be best calculated
to promote real spiritual progress? Cases are
known in which humble and arduous incarnations
have been chosen in preference to others of ease
and far superior social station.
The method of reincarnation in such cases will
follow the ordinary routine in one way. The
permanent atoms will be guided to their
destination in the mother and the growing child,
but the former personality is entirely complete
all the time, on the Astral plane, looking on and
perhaps being able to some extent to influence
the parents in the treatment of the child, who
will most likely exhibit psychic characteristics
of an unusual order - though for various reasons
this is not a matter of certainty. Eventually, by

the time the child has attained the age of
fourteen or a little more, and has grown a new
astral body identified in appearance with the new
physical body, the Astral of his former
personality will be discarded and the new life
will fairly begin, though it will not till later
on be infused with the intellectual attributes of
the Ego.
Infant prodigies are not necessarily, or even
probably, examples of the peculiar incarnations
just described. When wonderful musical faculties
are manifest at ridiculously early ages, that
condition can be traced to the impatience of the
musical Ego to express itself again on the
physical plane. Arithmetical prodigies may be due
to some unusual capacity in the new brain for
bringing over astral consciousness. But the study
of such exceptional phenomena lies outside the
effort to comprehend the normal working of the
laws regulating the sufficiently intricate
problems of ordinary reincarnation.
The importance of understanding these laws, as
far as that is possible, cannot be overrated.
They lie at the root of the whole scheme of human
evolution. To frame theories of human origin and
destiny without taking them into account would be
like trying to explain bodily growth without
comprehending the circulation of the blood, to
frame a science of chemistry without including
oxygen in the catalogue of "elements," to explain
light and sound without contemplating the idea of
vibration. Religion, as the world grows wiser,
will not be able to do without some comprehension
of spiritual science essential to the permanent
maintenance of spiritual emotion, of religion as
a force operative on conduct. Without the system
of rebirth, the physical world would have no
raison d'être. If spiritual beatitude could be as
well reached, without further contact with this
kind of life, by the debased savage, the
civilized criminal, and the altruistic

philanthropist, it would not have been worth
while for the Sun to shine, or the Earth to turn
round. The occultist knows the physical world to
be the climax of creative ingenuity. On lofty
planes of consciousness Divine purposes are
thought out. On these which are lower - in only
one sense - they are realized. By degrees the
realization becomes more and more complete, and
the Earth itself will share the progress of the
humanity it bears. Æons hence humanity will be
contemplating the results of this progress. To
part it from its heritage by denying it (in
imagination; happily that cannot be done in
reality) the right to keep in touch with it, is
to blunder into making nonsense of the whole
Divine scheme, in a way, moreover, which would
incidentally cheat the loftier planes of
consciousness of the perfected Egos they are
awaiting, in reliance on the plane of physical
manifestation - the nursing home of our, as yet,
imperfect selves. Those whom it has reared
successfully are continually outgrowing the need
of its guidance. Those who have hardly yet
profited by this are continuously pouring in. The
human family is a large one, though collectively
a mere episode in Divine manifestation. But the
episode is sufficiently elaborate and varied to
absorb our attention, and few of its aspects are
better worth notice than those which have to do
with the fundamental principle governing its
alterations of activity and rest, operative
throughout Nature in ways innumerable - in winter
and summer, in day and night, in sleeping and
waking, and in our constantly renewed touch with
the physical world as we descend from realms of
more refined consciousness, to get on with our
stupendous task of training human nature to be
Divine.

THE MASTERS AND THEIR METHODS OF
INSTRUCTION
THE splendid development of the Theosophical
Society all over the world has naturally given
rise to an eager desire on the part of earnest
Theosophists for detailed information concerning
those "Elder Brethen" of Humanity whom we
commonly speak of as "The Masters." At first, in
the imagination of most of us, they were very
mysterious entities. The Master "K. H.," of whom
I was enabled to speak in the earliest books that
gave the world a glimpse of "the White Lodge" (to
use a conveniently comprehensive expression),
remained for a long time the only one of His
glorious Fraternity whose personality was in any
way distinct in our thoughts.
Then we came to know about the Master "M," whose
name remained partially disguised by the initial.
But some of us have had touch, during the thirtyodd years that have elapsed since the
Theosophical Society took root as a permanent
organization, with many others of the White
Lodge, and, though some reserve on the subject
still seems desirable, it is thought equally
desirable in another direction that earnest
members of the T. S. should be able to form a
clearer mental conception of the Master condition
- and of the still higher levels of initiation
beyond - than is provided for in current
theosophical literature. I feel sure, moreover,
that the Masters Themselves wish to be better
understood in the Society they originated than
was generally possible at first. My present
purpose, therefore, is to deal with the subject
more freely than was hitherto been usual, and to
show how intimately the activities of the White
Lodge are blended with the affairs of the world;
how the Masters are much more numerous than was
at first supposed, and how They specialize in
dealing with the various departments of human

life, while working together in absolute harmony
of purpose; how Their Divine aspect - as we
regard Them from our point of view - is blended
with an intensely human aspect as They deal with
us individually, and how They, in turn, are
guided in Their action by the still loftier Will
above.
We cannot overrate Their power and knowledge if
we compare it with our own, nor can we overrate
Their limitation if we endeavour, in imagination,
to range the highest planes of consciousness in
which supreme Divine law prevails. Again, we
cannot easily do justice to Their affectionate
sympathy with human disciples struggling upwards
towards loftier spiritual life. In that way Their
human aspect is beautifully manifest.
The Master level of initiation is a fairly
definite stage on the path of spiritual progress,
but is in no sense a halting place. The next
great stage (initiations beyond common
comprehension intervening) is that of the
"Fathers," as they are called (or by an
equivalent term in another tongue). And I am
assured, though the idea is utterly beyond
incarnate understanding, that the interval, as
representing power, knowledge, and cosmic
experience, between the condition of the Master
and that of the Father is not less than that
between an ordinary cultured man of our race and
the Master. Within recent years there have been
many ascents from the Master to the Father level,
but in no way does any such ascent cut off the
new Father from the disciple's activities and
personal attachments of Himself when in the
Master condition. From our point of view He is
the Master still, so in thinking of Those we may
know we need not be curious concerning Their
absolute rank in the Mighty Hierarchy.
A simple fact not generally known throughout the
Society is this: there is a Master definitely

identified with, or, in charge of, every great
country or nationality in the world. Thus I have
had some touch with an English, a Scotch, and an
Irish Master; also with an American Master,
indeed, with more than one specializing in the
Guardianship of the United States. I know also of
an Italian and a French Master, and in all such
cases the Master in question, though He may have
held that rank for untold ages, and may have used
many physical bodies in the past, takes
incarnation in a body belonging to the nation or
race over which He undertakes to preside. He
generally resides at the capital of that State,
and this custom disposes of an absurd notion,
prevalent among Theosophists at one time when the
Master condition was very imperfectly understood,
to the effect that no "adept" could endure the
evil magnetism of great cities. In some cases and we happened to hear of them first - certain
Masters have found it convenient, so far as Their
bodies are concerned, to reside in remote
Himalayan districts. Their work has lain
altogether on higher planes, and all about the
world, under conditions involving the habitual
use of subtler vehicles of consciousness, but
They can, and sometimes do, materialize in the
midst of crowded humanity. He would be a poor
"Adept" who could not shield Himself from
inferior magnetic influences.
Obviously, by the laws governing the occult
world, national Masters cannot let Themselves be
known to ordinary people round Them for what They
really are. It is perfectly hopeless for anyone
not of their own order to try and identify Them.
In order to guard against possible confusion of
thought on the part of my readers, let me remind
them that of course there is a being of the Deva
order also identified with each great
nationality, but he is on a different line of
evolution altogether.

During happier periods of the past there was a
German Master, or more than one, but since Satan
has monopolized spiritual influence in Germany,
the White Lodge Masters have had to withdraw from
that country. The resulting condition of things
could only be elucidated by a long collateral
story into which I have no time to diverge.
One Master, whose work lies chiefly in America,
has been especially active in helping to guard
the transport ships carrying United States troops
to France, from torpedo attacks on the way. The
black and white forces on the higher planes are
each, all the time, trying to bend physical
forces to their own ends, and the way in which,
throughout this war, the powers of the whole
White Lodge have been strained in resisting the
Satanic attack, is ill understood as yet by the
humanity that owes its escape from the fatal
disaster to that tireless protection. The Master
to whom I have just been referring has been
identified with the American continent ever since
it was part of the still greater continent of
Atlantis. He is linked, in a very curious way,
with the Atlantean period. And this leads me to
speak on one condition associated with Mastership
that seems at first very bewildering. The
physical bodies of the Masters aften attain to
extraordinary ages, to be counted by centuries,
rather than by years. No incomprehensible miracle
is really involved.
During our youth we are all under the influence
of a force science has not yet catalogued, which
makes for growth and improvement. When we are
grown up it continues in operation for a time,
keeping the body in good working order. Then, in
the natural course of life at this stage of
evolution, that force ceases to affect us. Old
age sets in, etc., etc. The Masters understand
that force, among Their own intellectual
acquirements, and can turn it on or off at will.
As long as it is turned on Their bodies do not

show any sign of age. They may discard one body
and take another sometimes for reasons connected
with Their work, but They are not under any
natural obligations to do so.
It is well for ordinary humanity that they do not
know how to perpetuate physical life. At this
stage of our development our bodies are not worth
perpetuation, while, if we make the best good use
of them for about the usual time, the Karmic law
will give us better ones for our next physical
lives.
Masters not definitely linked with particular
nations may range the world at large, dealing
with its needs as they fall within the scope of
Their speciality. Thus, one Master, who has been
so freely spoken of that it would be affectation
to avoid using His name - the Count St. Germain has been busy in Russia ever since the revolution
broke out, trying to mitigate its hideous
development - with poor success hitherto, I think
He would be first to admit. It is a mistake to
suppose that He has only attained the Master
level in this life. I believe He has been on that
level for ages gone by, but He has been taking
partial incarnation for the past few centuries.
These have been traced back through the latest Francis Bacon - to various personalities
distinguished during the Middle Ages. The mystery
is a little beyond common comprehension, but that
series of lives, though certainly a continuous
series, never absorbed more than a part of the
great Spiritual Master in the background. I am
assured that there was about a third of Him in
Francis Bacon - a very magnificent incarnation
all the same. Many Masters work in this way.
Indeed, on a level a little below that of a
Master, the arrangement is practicable. And a
Master, if He sees fit, can run, so to speak,
more than one body at the same time. This makes
the identification of any particular Master on
the physical plane a matter of extreme

difficulty.
We ought to understand this possibility more
fully. Masters will sometimes, for special
reasons, take incarnation on some very humble
human level. I know of one deeply impressive
case. To fulfil some purpose of the White Lodge,
a certain Master (not to be identified with any
hitherto referred to in Theosophical literature)
took birth as a slave in Rome during the Domitian
period. It ultimately came to pass that he was
driven into the arena of the Coliseum in company
with a crowd of Christians, to be devoured by
wild beasts. Being what He was, He could, of
course, have slipped out of His body as easily as
any of us might take off a coat, and would not
have been at all inconvenienced by leaving it a
prey for the lions. But He saw that by staying on
in it, and using His power as a Master to pacify
the agonized apprehensions of the crowd around
Him, He could save them from the worst sufferings
of the ordeal. So He remained, and (here we touch
another mystery) by drawing into Himself the
vibrations of fear from others, actually felt
himself the intense pain of these vibrations. He
allowed Himself to be consciously killed by a
lion.
This is not the only story of the kind I quote,
but it ought to be enough to show the utter
selflessness ("unselfish" is an inadequate word)
that is one of the sublime attributes of the
Master condition. For me, I have always regarded
the arena incident as constituting the most
wonderful lesson in occult ethics I have ever
received.
The Master K. H., to whom I especially belong, is
pre-eminently concerned with the spiritual
progress of humanity. That is why we find Him the
lofty influence peculiarly connected with the
Theosophical Society. In Atlantean ages He was
generally to be found exercising exalted priestly

functions, while his great "brother" M.
(specialising in Power) was generally at such
times incarnated as a great King or Emperor.
Another Master - "H." will serve to identify Him
- is, amongst other specialities, in charge of
the movement known as Spiritualism. He has been
in charge of it since its inception, and before,
for it was deliberately planned by the Great
White Lodge collectively to control the growing
materialism of the nineteenth century. It was,
as definitely as Theosophy, a White Lodge
Movement, of which Theosophy was planned to be
the natural sequel. In view of this state of
things, the mutual antagonsim on this plane of
Spiritualism and Theosophy is pitiably ludicrous.
Spiritualists, refusing to believe in the Masters
and Their teachings, are fighting against their
own illustrious Chief. Theosophists, scoffing at
Spiritualism, are insulting the wise policy of
the White Lodge they profess to revere!
Again, it is foolish to overlook the splendid
work in the world spiritualists have done in
convincing millions that there is another plane
of existence, another life after this; and it is
marvellously foolish of spiritualists to spurn
the gift of fuller knowledge concerning that
plane and life offered them by Theosophy.
Spiritualism should have been the natural highway
leading to Theosophy, if the relation of the two
had not been greviously mismanaged on this plane
in the beginning.
Certain members of the Great White Lodge, on a
very high level, are concerned with the progress
of the world in connection with science,
literature, and art. The scientific "Master" (a
higher designation would be more suitable) is the
channel through Whom all new discovery and
invention (of dignified kind) naturally flows. He
inspires discovery at the appropriate times. In
the whole Divine programme great blocks of

natural knowledge are marked out for
dissemination on the physical plane at definite
periods. Discovery is never allowed to outrun
these Divine limitations. It may overtake them,
for the Master A. (let us call Him) does not use
men of science as automata or telephones. He
watches the drift of their researches, may,
indeed, prompt these, and then implants in some
receptive mind a new idea along that line of
investigation. That does not in the least detract
from the merit of the incarnate discoverer. He
could never have picked up the inspiration unless
he had developed his Ego capacity to the required
degree of perfection.
I know less about the way in which the artistic
Masters work, and will not attempt to describe
it.
What I have written is but an imperfect sketch of
the conceptions I have been able to form of the
Masters and Their work, during the thirty-odd
years I have been in touch with Them, never more
closely than now. But at the best on this plane
of consciousness we can only get a feeble grasp
of some of the features of the White Lodge life.
In its higher aspects the mere physical brain
cannot deal with its conditions.
If the only purpose that the Masters had in view,
when beginning to give some of us "instruction"
in certain occult mysteries, had been our
instruction, in the literal sense of the word,
their method would undeniably have been open to
criticism. They set us no lessons to learn; they
merely indicated a willingness to answer
questions if these did not seek information of a
kind They were forbidden to disclose. If we
imagine that system adopted in physical plane
schools a boy desirous of learning arithmetic
would fare as follows: "What do you want to
know?" the master would ask. The boy, utterly
ignorant of where to begin, might say, "I have

seen a queer mark in arithmetic books. Looks like
a V with a line at one end. What does it mean?"
The master would say, "That is the sign of a
square root, and it means the figure which
multiplied by itself would give the figure you
see." The boy might put away that piece of
information for future use, but ignorant, so far,
of multiplication, would not all at once be much
wiser.
Without being a gross caricature of the facts
that is the way we - for in the beginning I
worked with a friend who afterwards dropped out
of the Theosophical movement - obtained the
instruction that ultimately led to the production
of Esoteric Buddhism. On the face of things,
looking back, it really does seem absurd. We felt
that we were in close touch with almost infinite
wisdom and knowledge, and we plunged into some of
the most enormous problems of human evolution.
"How did humanity originate?" (We got a clue to
the existence of other worlds beside this.) "What
other worlds?" (We got a clue to the planetary
chain.) We asked innumerable questions about it.
We wanted to know how to become a Master. Got
very litle satisfaction along that line of
inquiry. So on, and so on. Really, looking back,
I am surprised I did not make a worse hash of the
teaching than my earliest book is responsible
for. Why was all this thus?
Firstly, there seems to be a settled habit in the
occult world defining teaching as a response to
inquiry. Our method is so different, because for
the most part instruction has to be rammed into
unwilling pupils. There are no unwilling pupils
in the occult world, and the knowledge is most
firmly implanted when it comes in response to a
definite desire for knowledge.
Secondly, the purpose of the Masters in making
the great Theosophical experiment was not to put
the world into possession of occult knowledge,

but to train those who proved qualified by
developing appropriate aspiration to become like
the Masters morally, as far as possible, so that
they might ascend the path of spiritual progress.
Some glimpses of the intellectual delights
attending such progress might be held out - had
to be held out, or the experiment was bound to
fail. The Masters had a very delicate task to
perform at first, in deciding how much knowledge
to give out along the line of this idea; how
resolutely to withhold knowledge that might be
misused. My own beloved Chief, who amongst other
attributes is the embodied essence of human
kindliness, has told me how he used to sympathize
with my annoyance when He had to refuse to answer
some of my questions. The time came when the
motive for such refusals was much less operative.
That change accounts for the way in which, during
the last ten or fifteen years, I have been able
to expand the original teaching (or what passed
for it) enormously, with the very curious result
that a good many theosophical students poring
over the earlier books, the Secret Doctrine
especially, cling to the impressions derived from
those earlier books, and resent the idea of
having them enlarged or, perhaps, in some cases,
corrected.
It really did not matter at first whether people
had correct or incorrect notions about planetary
chains, manvantaras, root races, and their
periods; of elemental nature, or the condition of
the world in earlier rounds. It was important
that they should get something like a clear idea
of the way in which the Divine Hierarchy represented for us by our Elder Brethen, whom we
now call the Masters - brooded always over the
world's welfare, and held out Their hands to all
worthy aspirants eager, or capable of growing
eager, to join that splendid fraternity.
Why did that first book, Esoteric Buddhism, start
the Theosophical movement in the Western world

as, in effect, it did? Because it made people
think of the Masters, and gave Them an
opportunity of thinking back, thus pouring an
extremely important influence into the world. A
deep occult truth underlies that idea. No one
gets direct personal notice or guidance from the
Masters unless he looks up to Them consciously in
search of it, in the first instance. He cannot do
this unless he knows something about them to
guide his thoughts. The earliest book gave
multitudes a hint of Their existence; made the
readers think of the Masters, however vaguely.
This gave them Their opportunity. They shed back
influences upon those who thought of Them. Few of
us have, even now, more than a very imperfect
conception of thought as a power. The thoughts
that flew back and forward among readers of the
earlier books gave rise to the Theosophical
Society. A long time elapsed before the Higher
Powers felt sure that it would last. Many people
imagine that it was founded in 1875. Look back to
the first volume of Isis Unveiled (p. 12 of the
Introduction), and reconsider that impression. It
was not until nearly ten years later that the
Society began to excite real interest in the
Western world, and nearly another ten years
elapsed before it was so firmly rooted that the
Masters could regard it as an accomplished fact.
In the interval between the early eighties and
the early nineties it went through vicissitudes
that almost killed it outright, but it survived
them, and its life became assured.
Then it was that restrictions, frightfully in my
way at first, faded away. Certainly the Masters
could not even then give out to the world at
large what are called the secrets of initiation,
but, as far as pure knowledge of natural law, the
course of human evolution, the conditions of
other worlds and their relations with our own,
the details of super-physical schemes in relation
to rebirth, after-death experiences, progress on
the Path, etc., etc., all these subjects were

thrown open to our inquiries, and the result has
been the enormous expansion of our knowledge
exhibited in writings some of us have been able
to put forth during the last dozen years.
A great deal of important teaching came through
during the latter end of the critical period
before the restrictions above referred to were
altogether swept away. The years from 1885 to
about 1902 were remarkable years in connection
with instruction from the Masters. The early
London Lodge included during those years a good
many earnest and qualified students, among them
Mr. Leadbeater and Mrs. Besant. And I had the
advantage of touch with my own Master through an
appropriate channel. The long series of London
Lodge Transactions which appeared during those
years will be seen, by anyone who looks back, to
be milestones on the road leading to the state of
theosophical knowledge at the end of the period
they covered. All they contained has long since
been absorbed into theosophical literature. Only
for those who may care to trace the history of
our teaching can they have an interest now. The
new series of London Lodge Transactions,
beginning in 1913, are on a different footing.
They have to do with later corrections and
additions to the earlier teaching obtained in
very recent years.
This light sketch of the history of our
theosophical education will, perhaps, help to
make some embarrassments intelligible. Few
students can be in constant touch with every
fragment of theosophical information that finds
its way into print, and though some of us are
keenly interested in Occult Science - knowledge,
that is to say, of super-physical Nature and its
marvellous machinery of law - that interest is by
no means felt with the same intensity by all. The
Masters, in my opinion, would be the last people
to wish that it should be the main object of
pursuit for members of the Society in general.

And yet that cannot be attained without some
appreciation of the great Divine scheme of which
we are a part.
It is desirable that all should absorb as much as
they conveniently can of the magnificent Occult
Science that explains our place in Nature and the
possibilities of our future growth. Broad, vague
impressions on these subjects are, however,
enough to give colour and meaning, so to speak,
to efforts we may all make toward living up to
the ethical teachings from the Master level, the
comprehension of which puts no strain on even the
most humble estimate we can form of our
intellectual capacity.

EXPANDED THEOSOPHICAL KNOWLEDGE
FIRST I propose to deal with the great mystery of
Consciousness, one which at the first glance
seems the most unfathomable of any we have to
study; then to set forth, in fuller detail than
has hitherto been found possible, the actual
present condition of human life on the planetary
chain to which we belong, and thirdly, to show
how our comprehension of the realm immediately in
touch with the physical life, though just beyond
its boundaries, the Astral world, has been
developed to an extent that we never attempted to
reach when Theosophical study thirty-five years
ago was mainly directed towards still wider
horizons.
1. - THE NATURE OF CONSCIOUSNESS
Consciousness is recognized by all physiological
students as a mystery they do not attempt to
explain. We can trace the activities of life back
though the muscles and the nerves, back to the
brain, but whence came the original impulses in
obedience to which the brain set the nerves to
work on the muscles? That question is left aside
as relating to a mystery beyond human
understanding. Nor shall I attempt to clear up
the mystery in the way we can sometimes
accomplish this when dealing with purely physical
phenomena; we must be content to treat
Consciousness as the fundamental Divine Principle
of all manifestation, but the illuminating idea
which I want to convey, is that Divine
Consciousness, itself, is, in its nature,
identical with any consciousness of which we can
take cognizance; that in a word there is only one
kind of Consciousness in all creation - the
Consciousness of God, working through vehicles of
varying capacity. Limited as we feel our own
consciousness to be, it is in its nature

identical with that of Infinite Divinity, as in
the other direction with that of animal and even
vegetable life. That which may be thought of as
the efficient value of consciousness depends upon
the vehicle in which it is working. Within the
body of a sheep its limitations are narrow
indeed, within that of an enlightened human being
they seem enormously widened; but whether we go
down in thought far below the sheep level, or
ascend in imagination far above the human
condition, we shall find that the vehicle of
consciousness in all cases determines the extent
to which consciousness itself can range over the
infinitude of knowledge.
When Darwin first started the evolutionary
theory, some of us were inclined to regard him as
having made the mistake of concerning himself
with vehicles alone, ignoring the concurrent
evolution of intellectual and spiritual capacity.
Without, perhaps, fully realizing the magnitude
of his own achievement, he was embracing in his
view of nature both the physical and superphysical processes of evolution. Although by
profound study the process can be comprehended
even at the level of its obscure beginnings, the
principle is better grasped if we confine our
attention to the development of consciousness in
the human being. By what law is the gradual
improvement of the vehicle as time goes on
provided for? Putting the answer in a brief
phrase, susceptible of further development in
detail, the law is that when consciousness within
any given vehicle exerts itself to the utmost, or
in other words, makes the best use of the vehicle
in which it finds itself at any given time, the
law - really a part of the great aggregation of
Karmic laws - proceeds to invest that volume of
consciousnss, that Ego, with a better vehicle for
its next physical manifestation.
I must here quote a line or two from Tennyson,
whose poetry, as we grow to appreciate it, is

saturated with occult knowledge. He writes in one
fragment to be found in almost the last published
volume of his works:The Lord let the house of a brute to the soul of a man;
And man said, "Am I Your debtor?"
The Lord - "Not yet; but make it as clean as you can,
And then I will let you a better."

In these compact lines we have the whole idea I
want to convey suggested, if not elaborately
expressed."Make it as clean as you can" means, of
course, make the best use of it, and establish a
Karmic claim on an improved house or vehicle. We
see the system working as we study the principles
of Reincarnation, working, of course, like most
processes in Nature in what seems at the first
glance a lopsided fashion. The lover of music
makes the best use of his musical faculties in
the life when that desire first governs him, and,
while perhaps neglecting other possibilities of
improvement, he obtains in his next life a
vehicle better adapted to the expression of
musical thought. So with any other line of human
activity. The lover of physical science finds
life after life his capacity for comprehending
the laws of physical nature ever and ever
improving; the philanthropist, unconsciously to
himself, is imbuing his permanent atoms with an
ever-increasing eagerness to benefit his fellowcreatures. Down to the minor developments of
intellectual capacity, the study of mathematics
or philology, the same invariable principle may
be discerned. No one can in one life clean all
the rooms in his house - to follow Tennyson's
metaphor; but by degrees all in turn will be
found to have claimed his attention, with the
ultimate result that the Ego acquires a vehicle
of consciousness perfected beyond the needs of
commonplace life, and passes into the ranks of
Those we know something of, the Masters of
Wisdom.

As one burst of sunshine may illumine a landscape
previously obscured by shadow, this simple idea
seems to clear up whole realms of vague
speculation concerning the processes we commnly
refer to by the vague term "evolution." And by
the light so shed on the whole subject, we begin
to put a scientific face upon a vast range of
cloudy speculation embodied sometimes in the
phrase 'The Immanence of God in Nature."
Imagination, of course, reaches out vaguely
towards the supreme problem: What is the nature
of the vehicle within which Divine Consciousness
works? and in that direction, at present, at all
events, it is useless for us to aspire. But fully
appreciated, the present interpretation of
consciousness gives unity and meaning to the
whole design of creation from mineral
manifestation upward through organized life to
infinitudes beyond. It will be found to harmonize
with every great idea that Theosophical thought
has been endeavouring to deal with. A compact
phrase I have often been fond of quoting rests in
its significance on the principle I have been
endeavouring to define: "Whatever is, is, has
been, or will be, human." At the first glance the
value of the phrase seems to reside in the
promise it holds forth that all human creatures
may aspire in thinking of the possibilities that
await them towards absolute infinitudes of
glorified existence; and it does that, but it
puts, so to speak, a scientific face upon the
maginficent prospect, and it fits in with every
idea we have been taught to work with concerning
the dependence of progress on individual
exertion. No one is lifted to a loftier level of
being than that on which he finds himself at any
given moment, by any Power exterior to himself.
Helped by suggestion I Yes, we may all welcome
such help as that; we can none of us dispense
with it; but the suggestion must in all cases be
a hint pointing to individual exertion. Actual
progress in every case must be the product of

individual will and effort, the effort to make
the maximum use of life's opportunities; or, in
other words, of the vehicle in which
consciousness for the time being is working.
Hardly any of the misty thoughts in which oldfashioned psychology indulged will remain clouded
by vagueness when the principle I am dealing with
gives them definite shape.
I will venture on a subtle illustration of this
idea. Thinkers who rather resent than aspire to
clearly defined knowledge concerning the
spiritual aspect of their own nature, are often
fond of treating Christ as a state of
consciousness. "The awakening of the Christ
within us," or some such vague interpretation of
the idea, is held preferable to any specific
knowledge concerning the levels in the Divine
Hierarchy at which we find definitely in
manifestation a Being from whom the Christ
Principle actually emanates. Attached as many
thinkers are to the cloudiness of mysticism, the
recognition of such a specific Being seems to
them to degrade the idea, and yet with the
knowledge concerning the Divine Hierarchy that
has been in Theosophical possession almost since
the beginning, we know that there is a specific
Being at a certain level within the Divine
Hierarchy of the Solar System, to whom we may
definitely look up as the conscious source of all
spiritual influence. This clear knowledge, far
from degrading the aspiration in each individual
Ego to comprehend spirituality, is just as
superior to the state of mind with which the
mystic is content, as the landscape illuminated
by sunshine is superior to the dim suggestion of
partial obscurity. Undoubtedly in all research or
teaching connected with spiritual truth mysteries
still lie beyond any that are being by degrees
cleared up - stretching beyond these to all
Infinity; but the more our knowledge is expanded,
the better we realize that cloudiness of thought,

uncertainty as we gaze upward, vagueness of
expression as we attempt to put aspiration into
words, are merely due to want of further
knowledge. As definite and precise as our
knowledge has now become in reference to the
simple phenomena of chemistry, so defined and
precise to a higher understanding must the
conditions of spiritual life ultimately become,
though to the ordinary human brain they must long
remain incomprehensible. There is no inherent
value in cloudiness of thought. That which we
ought all to be aiming at in dealing with any of
the mysteries hitherto embraced by the vague term
"occultism" is clearness and precision of
understanding. The Truth, if we could comprehend
it, is as clear and precise as any of those
simpler truths of nature within our grasp, and
the task before us is not that of continuing to
treat spiritual research as something too sacred
to be cramped by outline or form. There can be no
spiritual truth so exalted and for us at the
moment incomprehensible, which does not have as
clear an outline and as defined a mental shape
for consciousness working in appropriate vehicles
as the simpler relationships of molecular physics
already have for ourselves.
2. - THE PLANETARY CHAIN
The first idea we had about the progress of life
on planetary chains was, looking back upon it,
all we could be expected to understand at the
first blush. It was a huge expansion of the
elementary idea that this world was the beginning
of all things, and that its gradual creation
could be traced in the familiar language of
scripture.
The very notion of planetary chains was an
entirely new one which had to be assimilated by
degrees, and has needed in later years very
elaborate explanation. The planetary chain that

we belong to consists, as the early teaching
showed, of seven globes, the first and last on
the Manasic level, two others below these on the
Astral level, three on the physical plane. We
jumped to the conclusion in the beginning that
all planetary chains were alike, consisting of
seven globes, and the idea has unhappily
permeated Theosophical literature to that extent
that it has misled many thinkers. It is really
only the middle chain of a manvantaric series
that consists of seven planets; in the previous
Manvantara a chain had only five; in the one
before it, only three; and in the one before
that, only one. I will not stop to work out this
idea in all its scientific beauty. A mere hint
will be enough to show how the whole series of
Manvantaras is a harmonious conception beginning
with the Divine Thought - the first Manasic globe
- culminating in some supreme results that are
beyond our present comprehension in that far-away
future when the whole series will be complete.
But keeping our attention fixed for the moment on
our present planetary chain of seven globes, the
first idea we have to realize is that, when we
were told in the beginning about the great life
wave sweeping on from world to world, and for the
present occupying this earth, we were put in
possession of a broad idea which is perfectly
true, but which requires elaboration. The main
part of the human family to which we belong does
occupy this earth at the present time, but during
the various rounds of progress which have been
going on for an almost incalculable past, the
family has to a certain extent straggled over the
whole series of worlds constituting the Chain. At
present we shall find it impossible to understand
the conditions of life on the super-physical
planets, and we may leave them out of account for
the moment; but on the three physical, including
Mars behind us and Mercury in advance of us, the
human family is now distributed - part of it
already established on Mercury, part left behind
on Mars. The explanation is simple. While the

great majority swept forward to this earth, the
laggard remnant not yet qualified for incarnation
here remains on the planet Mars, a superior
vanguard already getting forward to the planet in
advance. The retarded condition of the Martian
remnant - counted, of course, by a fairly large
number of millions - consists of those who have
(reverting to my former explanation about
consciosuness) failed to make the exertions
required for the acquisition of superior
vehicles. There is no vehicle of human
consciousness on this earth amongst even the
lowest savages that is not definitely superior in
some important ways to the vehicles of
consciousness now inhabiting Mars. Strange to
say, as often happens on the downward arc, some
capacities are still active amongst them, which
enable them to do things that we ourselves, in
spite of our superior development, are unable to
accomplish. The Martian people can handle matter
by arts that we, to a certain extent, have lost,
though the use of such arts does not represent
superior intelligence any more than a spider's
capacity to make a web that no human art could
imitate, represents intellectual superiority on
the part of the spider. Morally, the condition of
the Martian people is below any level that we can
easily comprehend. Their forms are to our more
cultivated taste grotesquely ugly, and they
practically exemplify a saying applied with less
appropriateness to some savage races of our own
globe: "manners they have none, and their customs
are beastly." The animal life on Mars is at a low
level, corresponding to that of the people. It is
purely reptilian in its character, and the
development of taste amongst the people may be
imagined from the fact that their food consists
of the blood of the reptiles swarming in the vast
inland lakes, with which the habitable portions
of the planet are covered.
Even amongst the Martians the evolutionary law
which presses gradually on the multitude is

slowly working. Some Egos - for already the
Martians must be thought of as human - gradually
establish claims on a better vehicle of
consciousness than those around them, and then
they become qualified for incarnation on this
earth, and are brought over under the guidance of
appropriate emissaries from the White Lodge in
batches sometimes of fairly considerable number.
I have heard of a recent case in which within the
last year or two, a batch of about a hundred
thousand Martian Egos were imported into this
world, finding incarnation, some of them, in the
aborigines, as they are called, of Australia,
some in the lowest types of Central Africa, the
best of them amongst the populations of Central
Asia.
The conditions on the other hand involving the
premature migration of Egos from this earth to
Mercury are curious and interesting when
understood, but at this step of the explanation
it will be more convenient to stop and take a new
departure having to do with the relations of the
various planetary systems or chains of our Solar
System with one another.
Even in the first sketches of occult teaching, as
soon as the notion of the planetary chain had
been established in the mind, it became clear
that Egos evolving around any given planetary
chain, granting free will to each, must work out
different destinies. Some Egos would advance more
rapidly than others, so that at a fairly advanced
stage in the whole process there would be immense
intervals of conditions between those in the
vanguard and those in the rear. Then it was
explained that at a certain stage in the
development of any given planetary chain some
would have fallen so far back, as compared with
their more persevering companions, that physical
progress for the best would have advanced to a
condition in which the worst would not be
qualified to make use of the forms then in

process of development. In other words, and in
the rougher language of our first explanations, a
period is inevitable in each planetary sheme when
those who cannot advance farther drop off from
the main current of evolution, only those who
have made better use of their opportunities
reaching onwards towards the final possibilities
of their existence. This period used to be spoken
of as the critical period of the fifth Round, and
for a long time no information reached us as to
what would be the final destiny, in the case of
our own planetary scheme, of those who would fall
off from evolution at that remote period far
ahead of us, the middle of the Round destined to
succeed that with which we are at present
concerned.
Later information filled up this gap in our
knowledge, and in so doing threw a flood of light
upon the constitution of the Solar System as a
whole. Obviously the senior planetary scheme, of
which Venus is the physical world, has long since
passed that critical period, although for us it
lies so far still in the future. Already the
course of events must have decided the fate of
the failures of Venus at the critical period, and
the answer given me, when I was eventually
enabled to put the question, at once showed how
various planetary chains of the Solar System are
not to be regarded as entirely independent
undertakings. They are linked together in an
extremely intelligent fashion by the fact that
the Egos who become the failures of one planetary
scheme pass into the evolution of the planetary
scheme next in order of development; so the
simple answer to the question, "Where are the
failures of the Venus scheme?" is embodied in the
one word, "Here!" Certainly, in my own
experience, no one word ever before threw such
light on vast regions of speculation. One saw the
whole seven (or rather ten) planetary schemes,
all forming part of one coherent design; one saw
the reason why they were not all at this moment

in similar stages of progress; one could look
forward to the time when, for example, the planet
Jupiter, now an incandescent mass of mineral
matter, will become an inhabited home of future
races, when those which inhabit our earth will no
longer number among them any beings of a less
exalted spiritual rank than those we now think of
as the Masters, and when the future Jupiter
evolution will afford opportunities for a new
beginning to those who may have dropped out of
the evolutionary course designed in connection
with later developments of this world.
Now we come back to the further details of the
process. The Venus failures are here; more
precisely, what does that mean? In truth,
although failures from the present standpoint of
Venus attainment, they failed at a period in the
evolution of their own race already far in
advance of that reached by the great bulk of our
own people. None of them could be content with
such incarnations as are offered to humanity at
present, even by the most civilized races
inhabiting this world, or, at all events, no such
offers can be provided in anything resembling
adequate abundance. The problem as thus stated
almost hints at its own solution. I have already
said that the planet Mercury, belonging to our
chain, is actually the home of Egos constituting
the vanguard of our humanity. For the moment I am
leaving out of account those who, along the Path,
attain sublime spiritual conditions which, for
that matter, make them free of all the planets of
our chain. But Mercury, inhabited by the very
best, so to speak, of the human family, became a
region in which Venus failures could freely
incarnate, and at the present moment "Mercury" is
the more precise form of the word "here," which
impressed me so much when I first heard it used
in this connection.
And now let us realize more in detail the nature
of the life of which Mercury is the home. In many

ways it is so far superior to the conditions we
are familiar with here, that only by degrees can
we form any conception of it. In some respects we
are helped to do this by a book which, at the
first glance, has nothing whatever to do with
scientific occultism - Bulwer Lytton's delightful
story, The Coming Race. We do not go far in
occult study before coming into touch with the
frequent occurrence of literary inspiration.
Masters taking an interest in that work, and
finding sensitive authorship, will constantly
inspire poetry and fiction, while others, indeed,
are inspiring scientific thought; but that need
not be dealt with at this moment. The Master who
inspired Bulwer Lytton with the ideas so prettily
set forth in The Coming Race did not, so to
speak, give Himself the trouble to invent an
imaginary world of dignity and beauty; He simply
drew on His personal knowledge of the conditions
actually prevailing on the planet Mercury conditions absolutely familiar, not merely to the
great Masters, but to many of those of somewhat
lesser rank, who are already able, on the Buddhic
plane, to roam the Solar System at discretion.
Perfect harmony prevails in the delightful
Mercurial community: the Satanic influence which
has filled this world with strife and confusion,
whether we contemplate political, industrial, or
international relationships, has never penetrated
the peaceful regions of our beautiful sister
planet. Intellectual advancement has far
outstripped our own, and for many thinkers
amongst us speculating on the possibilities of
future sociology, it will be interesting to know
that in reality on Mercury, as in Bulwer Lytton's
story, the female half of humanity is distinctly,
though in no inconvenient degree, superior to and
predominant over the other half. It is difficult
to make the statement in any form of words which
does not convey at the first glance a
misunderstanding, because the very words male and
female, as we use them here, have very different
meanings on Mercury, especially from the

physiological point of view from those we attach
to the words in this less beautiful world. And,
again, when we talk of superiority and
predominance, we can hardly keep touch with ideas
that seem from our experience incompatible with
those others - the ideas of perfect harmony and
love. Really all these apparently conflicting
principles are susceptible of combination in a
perfect chord like varying notes in music, and
the whole subject tempts imagination. But for the
moment I must revert to the connection between
Mercury conditions and the claims on nature of
the Venus failures.
In its later evolution, possibly in obedience to
a law which may govern other worlds, the people
of Venus became very much more advanced students
of beauty - among other things - than we on this
world can claim to be as yet. That drift of
development was already operative with the whole
race before the critical period. So, as a matter
of fact, Venus failures now on Mercury are
enormously in advance of the earthly population,
as a whole, as regards the appreciation of beauty
on a level only represented amongst us, if at
all, by the greatest artists of our period.
Parenthetically I may here just mention a bit of
information that reached me a long time ago, and
seemed puzzling at the moment, concerning the
peculiar Karma which, in some cases, makes it
possible for Earthly Egos to be prematurely
transferred to incarnations on Mercury (I am not
talking about the inner round, which is a subject
apart). It is just possible for people
appropriately qualified by their Karma to be thus
transferred. I must not stop to go into the
numerous details of the subject, but one
characteristic required by people unconsciously
becoming qualified for the transfer, is the
artistic temperament. They must have some
qualification for appropriately enjoying the
heredity of Mercurial parents.

This whole department of the subject is curiously
fascinating. Of course, the word "beauty" must
not be used in any narrow sense, but in one which
includes the natural beauty of trees and flowers,
the loveliness of colour in a landscape, the
harmony of form in a structure, as well as that
beauty in the feminine aspect of humanity which
is perhaps the variety of beauty we all think of
first when we make use of the word.
As above suggested, not quite all the Venus
failures are already established on Mercury.
Some, if not actually amongst us yet, are
awaiting earthly incarnation, due, no doubt, to
their exact place on the scale of evolution, and
are meanwhile, from higher levels either on the
Astral of Manasic worlds, influencing artistic
thought, inspiring artistic achievement actually
in progress amongst us at the present time, and
this has been going on over what we are in the
habit of thinking of as long periods; short, of
course, as measured on the scale of natural
evolution. The whole outburst of artistic
capacity in Greece during that period the other
day which we call "ancient" was due to the way in
which Venus failures in our higher worlds
discerned in that race great capacities for the
reception of their influence. Roughly speaking,
all Greek art in sculpture may be regarded as
having been a gift to us from the Venus
immigrants, whom, from the Venus point of view,
we must still speak of as failures.
There is something eminently suggestive in the
fact that a more highly evolved, more morally and
intellectually perfect a race than our own, at
its present stage, should also be identified with
beauty for that matter, not merely in regard to
capacity to appreciate it, but in actual
manifestation. Looking back far to the rear of
our own place in evolution, we always find early
forms, more or less to our senses, ugly and
repulsive. The forms, indeed, of the degraded

remnants of the human family on Mars are simply
hideous, as compared with the best examples among
us. The animal life there is uncouth and
repulsive as compared with the animal life of
this world. Doubtless there are exceptions that
will leap into consciousness for everyone who
thinks on the subject, but very broadly the law
of nature appears to link the moral improvement
of conscious beings with corresponding
improvement in the beauty of form. When we
understand the intricacies of Karma better than
we do at present, it may be possible to find out
why men and women amongst us are sometimes
conspicious at the same time for beauty of form
and atrociously defective character. But
exceptions without, according to the stupid
proverb, "proving the rule," are at all events
compatible with its operation on a large scale.
And one more suggestion in connection with this
line of thought arises from definite information
about the people on Mercury. Without going into
indecorous detail, it is enough to say that the
birth of children is absolutely unattended with
distress or inconvenience for the mother. The
whole business of race propagation is in point of
fact so unlike our own, so infinitely more
charming and attractive to the imagination, that
incidentally it must mean differences in the
physical confirmation of men and women which may,
at the first glance, seem to conflict with our
present conceptions of perfect female beauty. And
yet I am assured by one, at all events, in a
position to form an opinion, that, without for a
moment denying the beauty of a perfect female
form of our kind at present, the perfect Mercury
woman, though very different, is the more
beautiful of the two. The perception of beauty is
a faculty that grows and changes in its growth,
and this thought reaches in both directions, so
that when I have sometimes sought to ascertain
why Nature's early experiments in form have
generally been uncouth and ugly, I have been told

they were neither from the point of view of the
lowly developed consciousness they were designed
to express.
3. - THE ASTRAL WORLD
Any reference to the real conditions of astral
life must bring us first of all into touch with a
situation - as lamentable as it is ludicrous that has established an almost impassable chasm
between the vast body of super-physical inquirers
engaged with the methods of spiritualism, and
those who have appreciated what with all respect
to the other I cannot but describe as the
infinitely more important line of study identifed
with the Theosophical movement. One might
laboriously trace the way mistakes were made in
the beginning, but as regards authentic teaching
from the Masters, on the strength of which the
Theosophical movement was launched, the subject
of astral life immediately following the death of
the physical body was simply neglected. Somehow
we were drifted in the beginning into concerning
ourselves with the gigantic principles governing
human evolution on a large scale, and disregarded
opportunities of understanding our immediate
future better than before, in a way which
painfully reminds one of the old story about the
star-gazer who fell into the ditch. The pity of
it, looking back, is intense. The Theosophical
movement ought to have been recruited wholesale
from the ranks of the spiritualists. As things
have turned out, it is only a few who can be
drawn across the gulf dividing most of them from
loftier work.
But now, forgetting all this, let us turn to the
accurate information which in later years some of
us have been able to obtain from lofty sources of
information concerning that astral world which
thirty of forty years ago the spiritualists
understood better than the first writers on

Theosophy, but which now we are able to examine
and interpret to an extent which puts the
knowledge acquired by the ordinary methods of
spiritualism in the background altogether.
To survey the astral world in its entirety and to
comprehend its manifold varieties of condition,
the survey must be on an altogether higher level
of consciousness than that of the normal
inhabitants. This idea, which is obvious as soon
as stated, is ignored, altogether by
spiritualists of the simpler type, who imagine
that because their friend has passed to a new
state of existence he must know, not merely all
about it, but all that relates to human destinies
beyond his own condition. And many spiritualists
will even accept negative testimony; a spirit who
quite truly says that he cannot perceive any
reincarnations in progress is held by his friend
on this plane to have proved that no
reincarnations take place; but in thus indicating
the necessary imperfection of the spiritualistic
method as a means of acquiring knowledge, let me,
before passing on to deal with knowledge acquired
in other ways, bear testimony to the maginficent
work that has been done in the world by
spiritualism in its relations with religious
thinking. The growth of materialistic belief in
the middle of the last century was so powerful
that, if entirely unchecked, it would probably
have extinguished religious thinking forever.
Spiritualism, by proving that there was another
life after this, and one with which we could get
into touch, broke up the domination of the
materialistic school in a way which no
theological influence could possibly have
accomplished.
Coming to detail, we find the number seven
playing an important part in the astral economy,
as in many other ways with which we are familiar.
It is a great mistake to imagine that seven as a
key number is one of any deep significance in the

universe at large. It has a deep significance as
regards our world, of which, after all, the
astral plane is merely a part - a part as
definitely objective as so much granite rock to
appropriate senses of perception. To those the
granite rock would hardly make an appeal. We must
think of the astral world to begin with as
consisting of a vast series of concentric shells
entirely surrounding this Earth, the aggregate
diameter of which is enormously greater than that
of the physical globe. It is difficult to get
measurements in miles when dealing with the
region of nature in which, for some purposes,
distance is almost negligible, and yet, in truth,
there are definite magnitudes in connection with
the various subdivisions of the astral world
which may actually be expressed in terms of our
measurement. Enough for the moment to realize
that the height above the earth's surface to
which the loftier subdivisions of the astral
world extend is to be thought of at least in tens
of thousands of miles. Then, if we begin to
attempt a survey of the varied subdivisions, we
have to recognize that the astral plane
interpenetrates the physical body of the earth to
a fairly considerable extent, and that the
regions thus submerged below the earth's surface
are horrible in their characteristics, though
definitely fulfilling a purpose in the Divine
plan of human evolution. There are two distinct
concentric shells of astral matter sunk within
the body of the earth. The lowest of all is one
with which humanity has scarcely anything to do,
or ought not to have anything to do, though in
the ghastly unprecedented conditions of Satanic
disturbance that we are going through, influences
from the lowest astral region have been brought
to the surface for our profound discomfort. Subplane No. 1 ought to be concerned merely with the
gradual disintegration of elemental forms that
played a part appropriately enough in the very
earliest history of this planet, but the need for
which has long since expired. Level No. 2,

immediately below the earth's surface, is the
real Hell of actual Nature, a condition of
suffering for those who drift thither that can
hardly be exaggerated in imagination. That such
suffering, however, is destined to be curative in
its character is a fundamental idea to which, in
investigating that region, we should always
cling. It deals only with the most hideously
degraded and atrociously criminal representatives
of our humanity.
Without for the moment attempting to go into
further detail in connection with this ghastly
department of the subject, we still have to
realize that when we consider Sub-plane No. 3,
that which is the fist above the surface of the
physical world, we are still in touch with a
purgatorial realm, the curative influences of
which are appropriate to evil-doers whose
iniquity falls short of that which leads to the
lower hell. Experiences on No. 3 may,
nevertheless, be a serious character. The
misapprehension people are so liable to fall into
in connection with this purgatorial condition
arises from a very common tendency to take too
severe a view of our own shortcomings. People
taught to consider themselves miserable sinners,
merely because they are leading a commonplace
physical life, are probably, in most cases, so
entirely innocent in reality that when free of
the body they will slip unconsciously through the
purgatorial region and wake up happily on some
level of the fourth sub-plane. Again, the study
of the purgatorial region is so intricate that
imagination is misled if we dwell upon it
elaborately before realizing the still greater
and altogether beautiful intricacies of the
higher sub-planes which, from the lower levels of
the fourth right up to the highest, are hardly
tinged with any emotion in the nature of
suffering. The intricacy and complication of the
vast fourth sub-plane will be readily
comprehended, when we think of it as the natural

future home of entities as varied as the
population of the earth, or, leaving out of
account the humbler multitudes of uncivilized
communities, the difference between individual
Egos within the limits of a civilized country
like our own are so enormous and elaborate that
natural law has, indeed, a delicate task in
providing all with perfectly suitable environment
in the restful period between two physical lives.
Close observation, to begin with, divides the
fourth sub-plane into another septenary series,
but seven is left far in the rear as a number
indicative of the need such life develops for
variety. On quite the lower levels of the fourth
we find life carried on with such close
resemblance to the conditions of physical life on
this globe, that when we hear of houses,
theatres, and amusements there, landscapes and
lakes, and actual furniture in the houses, some
of us start up indignantly with the idea of
associating such phenomena with a spiritual
condition. The spiritual life and the fleshly
life are, however,closely intermingled, not
merely in the living human body, but in the
super-physical worlds, appropriate to human
existence. There are people on the astral world
free of all painful embarassements, but who have
not climbed beyond the conception of happiness
associated with physical enjoyment. To find these
still available to the astral life their
aspirations in that direction must, indeed, be a
good deal refined, and we have always to remember
that the affections which play so important a
part in our life even here are still more supreme
in their importance on all the happy levels of
the astral world. Karma entangles incarnate life
with all kinds of associations, and though it may
permit us to enjoy some really congenial
companionship it often forces upon us a good deal
of the other kind. In the astral life, even on
the fourth level, not to speak for the moment of
loftier conditions, people are never thrown into
companionship which is otherwise than congenial.

This is one of the foremost assurances we gather
from people speaking to us from the next world.
Sometimes they are still with friends they have
known and cared for on the Earth-life, but in any
case with people towards whom they feel entirely
sympathetic.
In attempting this sort of survey, the magnitude
of the task is intimidating. We have accumulated
such a vast body of detailed information
concerning astral life, that, to use a favourite
similie, one cannot see the forest for the trees;
but keeping for the moment the generalities, let
me attempt to indicate the leading
characteristics of the vast fifth, sixth, and
seventh sub-planes of the astral world. These
must not be thought of as definitely superior to
the other. Throught the various minor subdivisions of the vast fourth sub-plane people do
actually get promoted, as it were, from one to
the other as their qualifications for enjoying
the higher regions become developed; but once
attaining the highest levels of the fourth, the
other regions are reached, not so much by virtue
of anything that can be thought of as promotion,
but in accordance with what may much more
accurately be described as individual taste.
Roughly speaking, the fifth sub-plane is the
region in which intellectual activity can most
easily expand; the sixth is more devotional in
its character, while the seventh is a region in
which those Egos that have played an important
public part in the Earth-life find themselves in
congenial companionship, and within reach of
opportunities for developing their own
qualifications as leaders of men in preparation
for future incarnations along that line of
activity.
The idea just hinted at interprets the enormously
significant fact that in various departments of
human distinction great Egos remain by preference
on the higher levels of the astral world instead

of passing on, as they conceivably might, to the
still more elevated conditions of the Manasic
plane. Let us consider, for example, the choice
to be made by the great men of science as they
pass on from physical life. Assume, first, that
they have no bad Karma to keep them for a while
on No. 3. They wake up on the highest levels of
the fourth in company with congenial friends in
their own line of development. They quickly learn
that on the fifth, to which they can pass on at
will, splendid opportunities for carrying on the
scientific researches to which they may have been
devoted lie within their reach. They see that to
take a forward leap to the Manasic plane would
break the continuity of their work - land them on
levels of perception out of tune with the science
they have been used to. It would carry them on to
another line of development altogether. By
keeping on the astral they acquire new knowledge
in tune with that of their lives just spent. That
will invest their Egos with expanded capacity. In
the next life on Earth they will be able to carry
on their work from the point at which they left
it off last, and they see the plain path of duty
before them.
The same principle certainly applies to the case
of the great poets of the past who are gathered
together on the sixth sub-plane, though in other
departments of artistic greatness complications
may arise. But how about people who are not
especially distinguished? Have they any choice as
regards astral and Manasic destinies? Serious
confusion of thought arose among theosophical
students in the beginning by reason of the way in
which we happened to pick up some quite correct
information about the Devachanic state. That is a
condition of blissful illusion on the lower
levels of the Manasic plane, appropriate to the
people innocent of wrong-doing, of affectionate
nature, but not highly qualified intellectually,
or in other ways, for active work or progress on
the astral plane. The mistake we made at first

was to suppose that the Devachanic state was a
goal to be aimed at by all. As we have come to
understand the life and opportunities of the
higher astral world, the mistake assumes a
ludicrous aspect.
Obviously the study of astral details is an
endless task, and can only be carried out
thoroughly when we are in personal touch with
them; but one idea not yet dealt with in this
hurried survey can be understood now, and claims
attention. Besides that which may be broadly
thought of as the stratification concentrically
of the astral world, it has vast divisions that
may be thought of as corresponding to the
geographical divisions of this Earth. Over the
great geographical areas of the Earth lie the
astral regions appropriate to the people of the
region below. Thus the astral regions over India
and other parts of Asia are quite different in
many ways from the astral regions over European
countries. This does not interfere with the fact
that movement from one part of the astral world
to any other with the velocity of light is open
to any one belonging to that world who knows, to
start with, that he has the power of getting
about in that way. In truth, that knowledge only
appertains to people who have ben making some
progress during physical life in occult study.
The vast majority of perfectly commonplace people
on the comfortable lower levels of the fourth
sub-plane never want to investigate, for example,
the corresponding conditions of the Indian astral
world. In a still more emphatic extent the Indian
on the astral never thinks of its Western aspect,
unless he belongs to the few who have travelled
West in life.
Does the geographical idea adapted to astral
conditions embarrass thought in any way? Are
there blank spaces corresponding to the great
oceans? Not at all. The ocean spaces allow of
conveninent adjustments. Our British astral

stretches half across the Atlantic, and no doubt
impinges (though I do not remember to have heard
of this as a fact) on the American astral,
necessarily a very wide domain.
For those who realize the importance, as well as
the possibilities of getting definite and vivid
mental conceptions of super-physical Nature, this
geography of the astral world is extremely
significant. It all helps to make the whole
complicated realm harmonious and restful for the
great multitudes. For all of us there may in
future be a time when nationality becomes merged
in some higher attribute of exalted
consciousness, but all progress is gradual. That
is the foremost principle to be discerned in
studying astral life. Spiritualists all recognize
it, as well as those who derive super-physical
knowledge in other ways. For a time people
passing on are on the other side just what they
were here. Especially, therefore, they are of the
same nationality as here. If all the nations of
the world were jumbled up together on the astral,
that world would not, as it does, show us the
laws and designs of Nature in perfect harmony and
accord - in that symmetrical aspect which appeals
so powerfully to the intelligent observer. That
is the peculiar charm of the later Theosophical
teaching. It enables all who truly understand the
Theosophical movement to feel that they are
engaged not merely in stimulating spiritual
aspiration, but in the magnificent task of
creating a true spiritual science.
4. - THE INFINITE FUTURE
As I have endeavoured to show, in dealing with
the phenomena of the astral plane, it is possible
to obtain clearly defined knowledge in reference
to some aspects of the super-physical future
awaiting mankind. The immediately "next world"
may become so vividly forseen during our stay in

this one, that its importance to us may be
appreciated in a way rarely attained under the
influence of simple religious thought. That alone
may give rise to a beautifully reverential
emotion in reference to the future life, but not
to the same kind of absolute confidence
engendered by specific knowledge. Take an
imaginary case - in illustration of what I mean from the possible conditions of ordinary life.
Suppose a young man entering some business or
profession is told by some friend, "You might do
better if you went to America." The young man
does not deny this, but still thinks he can do
fairly well at home, so he does not dwell in
thought on the friend's idea. Suppose he is
offered a definite engagement or opportunity in
America, and signs a contract to go there next
year. Will he not become at once deeply
interested in the conditions of residence in
America? He would read books about the country,
talk eagerly with travellers who had been there;
fit himself out with clothes and other things
appropriate to the climate he would know to be
that of his future home. He would not neglect his
current work, because he would know that his
efficiency therein would have much to do with his
welfare in the new life; but he would look on the
current work with an eye to the future, attending
to it all the more zealously so far as it trained
his capacity, but with a sense of detachment that
would make him relatively indifferent to its
immediate results.
Will the little parable fit the case of those who
are - and who are not? - destined to migrate at
no very distant future to the astral plane? Most
people, it is true, have made no attempt to get
information in advance in reference to the
conditions prevailing there, because they have
not believed any information on the subject to be
trustworthy. The misty suggestions of religious
doctrine left all details obscure. Spiritualism
incurred discredit in various ways, and the

importance of its main revelation was imperfectly
understood by the critical world at large; but
now we have to deal with a fuller revelation
conveyed to us by Theosophy. The history of the
movement since 1880 embodies its credentials. The
vision of the future is clearing up in many
directions. That department which includes life
on the astral plane is illuminated by a great
wealth of knowledge. For all who appreciate this,
that knowledge sheds light on the path they are
actually treading through the current physical
life, and with an expanded power of gazing into
futurity, we are already beginning to concern
ourselves with problems of infinite futurity
extending far beyond the range of astral
experience and physical reincarnation.
The feeling with which we do this is very unlike
that which governs the investigation of astral
conditions. The ultimate conditions of our
humanity when the history of this world is
complete are interesting only to thinkers who can
deal in imagination with states of consciousness,
so far transcending that of any personal life,
that they are content to lose touch with the
limitations which actually engender the feeling
of individuality. And if, as we may, we look
beyond the limitations of the one world we seem
to lose sight of ourselves. Thus the
contemplation of infinite futurity is not at the
first glance at all events compatible with an
interest in ourselves. But none the less does it
dignify all thinking, even of the kind which does
relate to ourselves. We know that the continuity
of our individual consciousness will never be
broken. Plant us suddenly in the state we shall
be in - say, ten million years hence - and that
would be so unlike our present state that we
should not recognize ourselves. The leap would be
equivalent to annihiliation of our present
selves. The gradual character of the change will
preclude this unhappy result. So we really may
discuss the problems of infinitude with composure

without making the great mistake of projecting
our personal limitations into infinity.
Campbell's poem - beautiful in some respects "The Last Man" is a ludicrous illustration of
this mistake. "I saw the last of human mould,
That shall Creation's death behold as Adam saw
her prime." No doubt "The Sun himself must die,"
but that will not happen till the Life of the
Sun, including ours, is transferred to another
vehicle, and we know enough to forsee the change.
We know that our Sun is one of many constituting
a stupendous Cosmos, of which the great star
Sirius is the centre. We can apply the rule, "as
below; so above," even to this state of things.
The planets of our solar system breed their
humanities, which attain perfection, and pass
into Divine Hierarchies. The aggregate
hierarchies of each solar system in the Sirian
Cosmos must have corresponding destinies on a
loftier level. With us, planet is linked with
planet in accordance with a comprehensive scheme
providing for the ultimate perfection of all.
Beyond doubt the solar systems of the Cosmos must
be linked together in a somewhat similar way. And
already we have learned something about their
destinies, which shows these analagous to the
idea underlying the succession of manvantaras in
each planetary chain of our system. A sun which
is in manifestation on the physical plane has in
a former manvantara been a sun on a superphysical plane, and will again, in some
mysterious upward arc of evolution, be on a
super-physical plane. I avoid saying on the
Astral or Manasic plane because these terms in
reference to the Cosmos must mean something very
unlike their meaning in this one solar system.
All through these mighty changes the continuity
of each individual consciousness concerned with
them will be maintained. However overwhelming to
the mind may be the character of these colossal
processes of change, we can already contemplate

them with open-eyed admiration, as on a lesser
scale we may contemplate the splendour of a
mountain range bathed in the colours of the
sunset. Even natural beauty and grandeur of that
order is uplifting in its effect on the emotions.
So with the mental influence of attempts to gaze
in thought at the infinitudes of spiritual
development. By comparison our Humanity seems so
small - if, indeed, we can think of it all as the
stupendous magnificence of the Cosmos is partly
revealed to us. In one sense, if we can forget
it, so much the better. Truth lies in some
paradoxical phrases about sublime results
attained by the loss of what seems everything for
the moment, but paradoxes may be misleading as
well as suggestive. If only by our capacity to
admire, we are identified with the glories of the
infinitude - the realm to which, attached to it
by ties that can never be broken, we eternally
belong.

THE PYRAMIDS AND STONEHENGE
INDEPENDENTLY of knowledge concerning the
spiritual growth of humanity, with which
theosophy is specially concerned, a great deal of
information that could not be obtained in any
other way may sometimes be acquired by
theosophical students in reference to the plain
external history of the world around us. Literary
research in such matters very soon reaches the
limit of its tether. In dealing with the remote
past it is paralyzed for want of written records,
and at the best can only supplement these by
interpreting a few inscriptions on stone. With
their aid we are enabled to reach back in the
direction of what Mr. Samuel Laing calls "Human
Origins" some 5,000 years before the Christian
era. But evidences which are not less certain
than those of Egyptian hieroglyphics, show us
that Man existed on the earth at past periods
which geology fails to estimate with exactitude,
but which certainly extend back millions of
years. In this way we are confronted with a
problem which, in its broadest aspects, only
admits of two alternative hypotheses. Either for
those millions of years mankind existed on the
earth in a savage state, never rising above the
use of the barbarous stone implements we find
associated with fossil remains, or he attained to
early civilizations at remote periods, the
regular historical traces of which have been
lost.
Comparing these two views, mere reasoning on the
basis of evidence that everyone is equally
qualified to appreciate will go far to support a
belief in prehistoric civilizations. In Egypt,
the testimony of the monuments and of papyrus
records, already translated, carries us back to a
period about 5,000 years B.C. But at that time we
find ourselves just as much in presence of
Egyptian civilization as at that relatively
modern epoch of Egyptian grandeur, the Eighteenth

Dynasty. According to the admirable German
Egyptologist, Brugsch Bey, Menes, the first king
of the dynasty mentioned by Manetho, altered the
course of the Nile by constructing an enormous
dyke, in order to facilitate the foundation of
Memphis. He was a law-giver, moreover, and is
said to have greatly augmented the pomp and
extravagance of the monarchy, thus showing
himself at the same time not merely a civilized
ruler, but one who had already contracted some of
the vices of civilization, a sure indication that
he belonged to a declining rather than to a
rising era of his country's progress. But, in
truth, people have got into the way of thinking
of him as if he were a primeval personage, merely
because he begins Manetho's list of the kings in
so far as that list has ben preserved for us by
the accident of its quotation by some classical
writers. The original work of Manetho vanished
probably in the smoke of the Alexandrian library.
It is known through other writers that Manetho
spoke of Egyptian epochs long previous to that of
the thirty dynasties; and even if he had not done
so, the situation faintly portrayed as prevailing
in the time of the Menes is enough to show that
it must have been the growth of a social progress
extending into the past for almost immeasurable
ages previously. Fifteen and not five milleniums
B.C. must be taken into account - according to
some of the modern Egyptologists now engaged in
translating the papyri - if we wish to frame a
picture in our own minds of the rise of Egyptian
civilization.
Turning now to another modern investigation, we
have to recognize that by degrees a mass of
testimony has accumulated on our hands in support
of the classical legend concerning the lost
continent of Atlantis. The Egyptian priests whom
he visited gave a great deal of information on
that subject to Plato's ancestor Solon. For a
long time modern scholarship was inclined to
treat the story as a fable, one hardly knows why,

because the recognized course of change on the
earth's crust makes it certain that most of what
is now dry land was once ocean bed, and vice
versa. There is an a priori probablity,
therefore, that some such continent as the
"fabled" Atlantis must once have existed. And now
there are abundant evidences, derived from the
surveys of the Atlantic bed within the last few
years, to show that the site assigned to Atlantis
was probably that of great land masses during
some former configuration of the earth's surface.
Furthermore, comparative archæology brings out
identities between the pre-historic symbolism and
remains of Mexico and Central America on the one
hand, and those of Egypt and Syria on the other.
These point to a common origin which Atlantis
would exactly supply. A persevering explorer of
Mexico and Yucatan, Dr. Le Plongeon, has, to
quote a recent and very striking scrap of
evidence, succeeded in deciphering the character
in which ancient Mexican inscriptions are
written, and has even translated a very old
manuscript saved from the vandalism of Cortez and
his attendant monks. This turns out to include a
straightforward record of the final catastrophe
which swallowed up the last remnant of Atlantis
ten or twelve thousand years ago.
The question of Atlantis is immensely important,
and I am, for the present, merely referring to
the chain of reasoning by which its actual
existence in former days is supported. A thorough
examination of the merely exoteric evidence on
the subject would be a large undertaking in
itself, and I have another task before me for the
moment. But all theosophical students, and even
cursory readers of theosophical books, will be
aware that the teaching concerning the origins of
the human race that have been given to the world
in connection with the inauguration of the
theosophical movement, gear in with that belief
in the former existence of the Atlantean
continent which, as I have shown, is making its

way even in the outside world, which has nothing
to do with theosophy. Humanity, according to all
theosophical authorities, is evolved through a
series of great root races, of which the
Atlantean race was the predecessor of our own. I
do not put forward the statement as in itself
conclusive, because the whole character of
theosophic teaching - as far as its really
qualified exponents are concerned - is opposed to
the principle of ex cathedra assertion. The
regular method of instruction adopted by the
Masters of occult science is to show the student
how his own interior dormant faculties may be
awakened and brought to bear on the discovery of
truth, whether it has to do with the planes of
Nature and consciousness superior to our own, or
with periods of the world's history long anterior
to our own. Until the pupil is sufficiently
advanced to have the power of applying his own
direct perceptions to the questions he may wish
to investigate, he is almost discouraged from
taking the statements of others, more advanced
than himself, on trust. But, at the same time, we
must steer a middle course between the attitude
of mental servility and the attitude of narrowminded incredulity. For the reasonable theosophic
student which has found substantial ground for
relying on the knowledge and bona fides of the
occult Masters, from who our current theosophic
teaching has been received, the statements they
make in reference to such matters as the
character and place in Nature of the Atlantean
race will necessarily have very great weight.
Indeed, I may go a step forward in explaining why
some theosophic students at all events come to
look upon facts concerning Atlantis, and the
light that can be thrown by occult enquiry on the
remote history of Egypt, as coming within the
range of something nearer to them than the
knowledge of their higher teachers.
An instrument of research is placed in the hands

of theosophic students sufficiently advanced to
make use of it, which actually brings a great
deal of the ancient history of the earth within
the reach of their direct perception. This is the
faculty of actually seeing, with an inner sense
adapted to the process, former states and
conditions of any place or object with which the
seer or clairvoyant may be in contact. Many
people of our day are so ill-informed concerning
the most interesting developments of science in
progress around us, as to disbelieve in
clairvoyance from A to Z. To those of us who know
better, that is like disbelieving in the
differential calculus - an attitude of mind
simply absurd in presence of recorded facts and
experience. Clairvoyants may be one per mil, one
in ten thousand if you like, of the population at
large, but they are sufficiently numerous to make
the reality of their capacities as certain as the
occasional capacity of the human mind to
understand the higher mathematics.
Clairvoyance has many varieties and
ramifications, but that with which I am concerned
for the moment has been called - rather clumsily,
perhaps, by modern writers dealing with it psychometry. In its simplest manifestation it is
not very uncommon. I have met many people,
besides those who have had a regular occult
training, who are able, by fingering a letter,
without looking at it or reading it - or perhaps
by putting it to their foreheads - to get
impressions concerning the person who has written
it, extending sometimes to an accurate
delienation of his outward appearance and
character. Now, this accomplishment depends upon
facts of Nature that are enormously important in
their wider manifestations. Psychometrising
letters bears to the law under which it becomes
possible much the same relation that the
experiment of rubbing sealing-wax so as to make
it attract little bits of paper bears the whole
science of electricity. There is a medium in

Nature in which pictures, so to speak, of all
that has ever taken place on earth are
indestructively preserved for ever. This medium
is spoken of in the occult literature of the East
as the Akasa. European medieval occultists mean
the same thing when they speak of the astral
light. This astral light includes a record for
those who can perceive and interpret it, that
dwarfs to insignificance the value, for
historical purposes, of all the written documents
the world contains.
Psychic faculties of a very adept-like order,
educated, moreover, with scientific precision,
and borne up on a highly spiritualized character,
are required for the complete exploration of the
astral light. Such faculties belong to the higher
theosophic teachers, and it is partly to their
exercise that is due the knowledge concerning the
remote past of the world which they possess. I
say "partly" because, in truth, the higher
initiates of occultism possess written records
that have been handed down to them by a line of
predecessors, but their own faculties enable them
to verify these at any time. And, in truth, there
are stages of development which many of their
pupils reach from which a great deal of
historical - not to speak for the moment of other
sorts of - information can be gathered from the
astral light. This has sometimes been called the
Memory of Nature. All memory - even that of the
most familiar kind - is in truth a reading in the
astral light. But the faculties that have not
been developed by occult training are only
capable of reading those records, at the making
of which the person concerned has actually been
present. Only with those have his astral senses
been closely enough associated to make it
possible for him to recover touch with them at
will. The occultist whose astral senses are very
much more delicate is able to follow other
channels of association, other magnetic currents,
to use the technical expression, and this hint

gives us the clue to the comprehension of the
psychometric faculty.
Tangible objects, as well as the inner vehicles
of human consciousness, are connected by
permanent magnetic currents with the astral
records that have been originally established in
their neighbourhood. The trained occultist, by
touching or handling such tangible objects, is
enabled to get upon these currents, to put his
own astral senses into the same relationship with
the astral records to which such currents lead,
as that which normally exists between his own
astral self and bygone scenes of his own life
that he has witnessed. Take the case of
recollections any of us may entertain of some
distant place he may formerly have visited.
Desirous of remembering it, he turns back his
thoughts upon that page of his memory, and in a
certain interior way may be said to see again the
scene of which he thinks. The occultist in the
same way lays his hand upon the stones of a
building - or it may be enough for him merely to
come near them - and he can follow the magnetic
thread of connection which leads back his
consciousness to the early events with which they
were associated.
This is the way in which, for the occultist, the
pyramids of Egypt may be made to tell their own
story very much more fully than it is possible to
trace this with the help of fragmentary
inscriptions or documents accidentally surviving
the destroying influence of time. The extent to
which the psychometric faculty is trustworthy in
the case of people below the level of adeptship
is a question that can only be considered in
reference to each case in turn; but, at all
events, I have had the advantage of being
assisted - in such attempts as I have made to
penetrate rather more deeply than usual the
mystery of Egyptian antiquities - by psychometric
power of a very high order, and I have been

enabled to check the information I have thus
received through the fuller knowledge possessed
by those from whom the teaching put forward in
various theosophic books from my hand has been
derived. In this way I have been enabled to build
up a conception of the early beginnings of
Egyptian civilization which constitutes a
coherent and intelligible sketch of the whole
process, and synthesises in a very interesting
manner a great deal of disjointed speculation
concerning the evolution of the human race
towards which archæological research of the
ordinary kind has been groping its way. I will
now put forward the story for the benefit of all
who may be sufficiently in touch with occult
methods of investigation to appreciate its prima
facie claim to attention.
Of course, the investigation of Egyptian
beginnings brings us into relations with the
Atlantean race. If we go back far enough in the
history of mankind - if we go back a million
years - we find ourselves in the midst of a
period when there was next to nothing else in the
nature of a population on the earth, except the
Atlantean race - inhabiting many regions, as the
earth was then configurated, besides those which
formed part of the continent of Atlantis - just
as at the present day, to draw an illustration
from one of the minor ethnological divisions of
our own great race, the Caucasians inhabit many
other regions of the earth besides the Caucasus.
But different ramifications of the same root race
may differ very widely from each other: and at a
time when the main body of the Atlantean race on
the continent of Atlantis had attained a very
high degree of civilization and power, Egypt,
amongst other countries, was in the occupation of
a relatively primitive people, whom we need not
think of as savage or barbarous in the worst
sense of those words, but for whom the arts and
customs of civilization were as yet a closed
book.

As far back as 800,000 years ago the Atlantean
continent, having all but fulfilled its destinies
in the education of the human race, began to melt
away. The process was inaugurated at the period
just mentioned by a geological catastrophe, on a
very stupendous scale; but that merely began, it
did not accomplish, what is known to occult
history as the submergence of Atlantis. The
continent held out against the destructive forces
of Nature till about 80,000 years ago, when some
considerable portions surviving till then finally
disappeared, leaving one big island - the
Atlantis of classical tradition - which perished
in a great natural convulsion about 11,500 years
ago, a date originally derived from occult
teaching, and approximately confirmed by Le
Plongeon's discoveries, to which reference has
already been made.
During the enormous period covered by the gradual
submergence of the great land masses of the
original continent, extensive migrations to other
regions of the then existing world were
accomplished by detachments of the Atlantean
people. The most spiritually enlightened and
advanced representatives of the race were
especially involved in these migrations. The
destruction of Atlantis as a physical process was
proceeding parri passu with the moral degradation
of the people. The adepts of the race shrank away
as much from the incurable degeneration of their
countrymen as from the doomed continent whose
fate they foresaw. It was not in that decaying
and corrupt civilization that their influence
could any longer be exerted with advantage. They
had to discover a younger and more vigorous human
stock, on which to graft the spiritual impulse on
which they were the custodians.
At that period a large part of Europe, especially
of eastern Europe, was an uninhabited swamp scarcely upheaved from the ocean to which

Atlantis was returning. But Egypt, though very
different in its geography from the Egypt of the
present day, was already inhabited land, as also
were the countries bounding the Mediterranean on
the east. Somewhere about the middle of the
enormous period assigned to the submergence of
Atlantis, a good many of the Atlantean adepts,
accompanied by considerable numbers of their
uninitiated contemporaries, settled in these
countries, as also by degrees, and later on, in
the western regions of our present Europe, as
well as in many parts of the eastern world. On
ground which is now part of our own British
Islands, though it had not at that time separated
itself from the main continent, Atlantean adepts
left traces of their presence, some of which
survive to the current epoch. In Stonehenge we
possess a memorial of the Atlantean dispersion,
though that structure is of more recent date than
the pyramids of Egypt.
For a very long time the adept immigrants who
settled in what is now Egypt did not attempt the
education of the people in the arts of
civilization. They simply resided in the country,
and there, no doubt, brought individual pupils,
and upheld the higher spiritual knowledge which,
however ill qualified to assimilate it the bulk
of mankind at any time may be, can never be
allowed to die out altogether, even if its
guardians, as they sometimes may in the crises of
human evolution, diminish to a few in number.
What may have been the nature of the unseen
spiritual influence they were bringing to bear
all the while on the people amongst whom they
lived, is a question that I need not attempt to
deal with here. The race around them was
gradually ripened for the teachings of a lofty
civilization, and no doubt was largely augmented
and elevated ethnologically by the infusion of
the immigrant blood, for, as I have said, large
numbers of Atlantean people, besides those who
represented the adeptship of the period,

accompanied their spiritual leaders in their
migrations, and mingled their descendants with
the original inhabitants of their new home.
Thus, at last, a time came when the seed sown
amongst them germinated effectually. The adepts
began to teach and rule as well as to reside in
Egypt. The vague traditions as to long lines of
Divine Kings, who preceded those dynasties
chronicled by Manetho, are no mere fables of an
infant humanity, as the narrow-minded ignorance
of materialistic critics in the nineteenth
century too often supposes them. The Divine Kings
of Egypt were the early adept rulers, and the
golden age of Egyptian greatness was that over
which they presided, in millenniums far back in a
past so remote that one almost hesitates to
handle the real figures, amongst people of whom
only a few as yet can have become completely
emancipated from the mental fetters, as regards
the duration of the world's history, forged for
modern Europeans by the imbecile interpretation
put by the theology of the Middle Ages on
chronological statements of the Bible. In
following back the history of the earliest
monuments of Egyptian civilization, by the help
of those imperishable records still to be found,
as vivid as ever, in the Memory of Nature by
those who know how to gain access to its
boundless picture-gallery, we do not have to add
at a venture a few extra millenniums to the
conventional dates of modern Egyptlogists, but to
measure their ages on the scale of Atlantean
history. It was at a midway period between the
first immigration of Atlantean adepts in Egypt,
and the stage of the world's progress we have now
reached, that the pyramids were really built, or,
in other words, a little more than two hundred
thousand years ago. Closely connected as they
were in their origin and purpose with occult
mysteries, it is impossible to obtain from
initiated informants in the present day any very
precise statement concerning the design which

they subserved in the beginning. I have gathered
a hint to the effect that, although no doubt from
the beginning used as and designed to be temples
or chambers of initiation - the great pyramid,
for one, certainly containing other chambers
besides the three that have been discovered - one
purpose of the great pyramid was the protection
of some tangible obects of great importance
having to do with the occult mysteries. These
were buried in the rock, it is said, and the
pyramid was reared over them, its form and
magnitude being adopted to render it safe from
the hazards of earthquake, and even from the
consequences of submergence beneath the sea
during the great secular undulations of the
earth's surface.
This brings me to one of the most remarkable
facts about the pyramids, among those which
modern research has never suspected. Within the
enormous period of the existence there has been
time for more than one of those great changes in
the configuration of the earth brought about by
what some geologists, at all events, recognize as
a necessity of its constitution. The alternative
elevations and depressions of continents and
ocean beds are due to a slow pulsation of the
body of the earth, that may be likened, as
regards the surface, to the undulations of a sea
that has settled down in a condition of almost
perfect calm, but is still gently heaving under
the influence of an all but imperceptible swell.
Probably there are cross currents in such
undulations that may occasionally intensify, and
occasionally minimize them; but, at any rate,
they cannot be excluded from any reasonable
scientific hypothesis concerning the progress of
geological growth, however far beyond the reach
of our very brief historic records their last
manifestations may be withdrawn.
Occult information on the subject brings some of
them into view, and since the erection of the

earliest pyramids one such undulation - connected
with that which had to do within the final
submergence of the last bit of the old Atlantean
Continent - depressed the region which is now the
Lower Nile valley below the level of the sea
which spread over the northern part of Africa except for the high lands near the Mediterranean
coast. The west coast was also dry land at the
period in question, but the present desert of
Sahara was a sea, and that sea spread over the
whole country now fertilized by the Lower Nile,
as the huge undulation depressed its level.
The country of the Upper Nile was not submerged,
and thither no doubt the population of Egypt, to
a large extent, withdrew, although the
submergence, I understand, was cataclysmic enough
in its character to involve some destruction of
life among those who clung longest to the menaced
region. At all events, I am told that there was a
considerable migration of the people to the east
and west, as well as to the south, and for a time
- I do not know exactly for how long, but for a
short time compared with the general course of
the undulations of the great rock-sheet of the
earth - the pyramids and the country round
remained under water. Incidentally this will
suggest that the present course of the River Nile
was not that which it followed before the natural
convulsion in question. The course to-day
differs, I am told, as a matter of fact, from
that which it followed in the age of the great
pyramid's construction as high up as Thebes. The
temple of Karnac is an Egyptian monument of
enormous antiquity, though not so old as the
great pyramid, and it never shared the
submergence of the pyramid; but as far as the
course of the river was concerned, that was
different from what it is now, even as high up as
Thebes, at the time of the erection of the temple
of Karnac.
The sea again receded from lower Egypt after an

interval, the exact duration of which has not
been given to me, and the pyramids were again
left dry. Rapidly as compared with the geological
changes in progress, it was doubtless repeopled,
and again taken in charge by the adept kings. I
am inclined to regard the period which now came
on as the really golden age of Egyptian
civilization. The decline did not set in till
much later. But Fate held another shock in
reserve for the ancient State. When the last
island remnant of Atlantis was submerged with
cataclysmic violence about 11,500 years ago, an
undulation of the oceans led to some enormous
inundations, and without again becoming the bed
of a sea as on the former occasion, the land of
Egypt was overwhelmed with an immense flood,
which again dispersed its people. I do not
understand that this was on such a scale as again
to submerge the pyramids, but, at any rate, the
population was drowned or driven out of the
surrounding country - for a time. When, in turn,
this flood passed away and population spread
again over the land, there began that downward
movement of spirituality and culture which, from
the occultist's point of view, is the final brief
period of the decadence of Egyptian civilization,
though, for the modern Egyptologist, it includes
the whole range of Egyptian history, behind which
some inquirers begin to look out for the
evidences of primitive man.
Probably when the decadent period began, or was
somewhat advanced, the tangible objects, whatever
they were, which the great pyramid was designed
to cover, were removed to some other country
chosen as the headquarters of the world's
adeptship. And though, as long as the ancient
wisdom religion survived in Egypt to any
considerable extent, the pyramids continued to
fulfil their purpose as temples of initiation, by
degrees, no doubt, the full knowledge concerning
their uses in this respect faded out from among
the people. On the face of things, it would only

be initiated adepts that chambers dedicated to
secret ceremonies could be put to such uses, and
with the fading out of the adept element in the
population, due to its own moral deterioration,
the old traditions would naturally be lost. This
consideration will, amongst others, abundantly
account for the multiplication of pyramids in
comparatively recent ages, when certainly, there
was no thought on the part of the builders of
using them in connection with the introduction of
neophytes to the mysteries of occult science. As
late as within the last few thousand years some
of the pyramids along the Nile valley have been
erected. While, therefore, occult teaching
entirely discountenances the conventional theory
that the pyramids in all cases were put up to
serve as the tombs of monarchs, it opens the door
to conjectures along that road as regards some of
the latest among them. From an antiquity with
which the decadent dynasties had probably lost
touch, the example of the earlier pyramids as a
fashion in architecture had obviously been handed
down.
Certainly the coffer of the great pyramid was
neither a sarcophagus nor, as Piazzi Smyth
conjectures, a standard measure of capacity, but
a font in which certain baptismal ceremonies
connected with initiations were carried out. It
is possible, however, that in the later and
degenerate period of Egyptian history - to which
all the Manetho dynasties belong - some of the
kings, losing touch with the ideas associated
with the more ancient pyramids in the beginning,
may have followed the fashion of their
architecture without knowing why it was
originally designed, and may have put up pyramids
to be their tombs. I understand definitely that
this was the case, but the fact in no way
militates against the explanations just given.
The great pyramid has been assigned by most
Egyptologists to a king of the fourth dynasty,

generally known as Cheops, or more correctly, to
students of hieroglyphics, as Khufu. That monarch
is supposed to have built it, and to have gone on
adding to its size as long as he lived. As his
reign was a long one, the enormous magnitude of
the building - standing on a base the size of
Lincoln's Inn Fields - is thus accounted for. My
own information is to the effect that Khufu
simply restored some portions of the pyramid that
has suffered injury, also, for reasons that I
have not heard stated, closing up some of the
chambers that were previously accessible. It is
admitted by modern Egyptologists that the
evidence which points to Khufu as the builder of
the pyramid is meagre, although the original
guess has been quoted so often now that most
writers assume it to be somehow known as fact.
The manipulation of the enormous stones used in
this edifice, as also, indeed, the construction
of the great pyramid itself, can only be
explained by the application to these tasks of
some knowledge concerning the forces of Nature
which was lost to mankind during the decadence of
Egyptian civilization and the barbarism of the
Middle Ages, and has not yet been recovered by
modern science. This branch of the subject,
however, may be conveniently reviewed in
connection with some other architectural bequests
from the ages in which the adepts dispersed from
Atlantis were still taking part in the external
life of Egypt, and, indeed, of some other
countries now forming part of the European
continent. In England itself we have
architectural remains connected with the
ascendancy here at one time of Atlantean adepts,
the interpretation of which has been as much
clouded by fantastic theories as by the passage
of the ages that have gone by since their
erection.

Stonehenge is a riddle that has perplexed
speculation as profoundly in its way as the
pyramids themselves. Most archæologists have
assumed that it was erected by the Druids of
ancient Britain, who were already disappearing as
a priestly caste at the time of the Roman
invasion, although still carrying on secret and
sanguinary rites to which some Roman historians
have referred. This somewhat crude conjecture,
which offered no explanation of the methods by
which an uncivilized race of people like those
inhabiting the Britain that Julius Cæsar
conquered, could have handled the enormous
monoliths of which Stonehenge consists, did not
satisfy Mr. James Fergusson, who has devoted so
much painstaking research to the subject of the
Rude Stone Monuments, dealt with in his
interesting volume bearing that title. Mr.
Fergusson had a passion for discerning a recent
origin in all the remains of antiquity, and,
taking advantage of the obscurity that hangs over
two or three hundred years of English history,
following on the abandonment of these islands by
the Romans, he has developed an elaborate
hypothesis, according to which Stonehenge was
erected in the time of King Arthur, to celebrate
one of the twelve great battles in which that
hero is said to have overthrown the heathen. Mr.
Fergusson will have nothing to say to previous
arguments that had assigned a religious purpose
to the great relics on Salisbury Plain, and makes
them out to have been nothing more than stones
set up to commemorate a victory. He could not by
any intentional efforts to that end have supplied
us with a more grotesque reductio ad absurdum of
that general view of the world which regards the
civilization now around us as having grown up
from an immediately preceding condition of
primeval human infancy. One of the reasons for
which Mr. Fergusson rejects the Druidical theory
is derived from the impossibility of supposing
that such a mere race of savages as the Romans
found in Britain could have handled the stone

masses of which the ruin in question consists;
but he is content to pass lightly over his
embarrassment in dealing with his own theory, on
the assumption that after the Roman occupation
the Britons would have picked up a good deal of
engineering knowledge from their conquerors. The
Romans themselves would have been no better able
than the Britons to manipulate the materials of
Stonehenge. The "imposts" or upper stones of the
great trilithons are themselves about eleven tons
each in weight, and the uprights thirty tons
each. It is nonsense to talk of such masses as
being moved about and set up in their places with
great exactitude by builders simply employing the
strength of human muscles in the work. The
mechanical resources of the present day would be
heavily taxed to erect a second Stonehenge beside
the first. Nor is the absurdity of such a
hypothesis measured merely by the weight of the
monoliths on Salisbury Plain. By Mr. Fergusson's
own admissions we have to bring into our survey
of the past the remains of Stonehenge and
Avebury, and also the innumerable "dolmens" that
are found about these islands, and in larger
numbers in France, Spain, and Scandinavia. It is
no use to give an explanation that will fit in
with facts in one case, if it fails to square
with those of another. The dolmens have to be
accounted for as well as the Arthurian battle
memorials. And in the case of some among the
dolmens the weights to be dealt with throw those
of Stonehenge into the shade. Dolmens are simple
structures, in which one mass of rock - the
capstone - is hoisted up on three or more
supports; and one measured in Cornwall, in the
parish of Constantine, is computed to weigh 750
tons. Another in Pembrokeshire is a great tabular
slab, big enough for five people on horseback to
take shelter beneath it. What were the uses to
which these strange monuments were put? The
Arthurian hypothesis leaves the matter as much in
the dark as the Druidical theory at which Mr.
Fergusson takes offence. And the notion that the

Britons might have become qualified to raise
capstones weighing 750 tons, merely because they
had picked up some engineering skill by watching
the Roman road-makers, is too childish to
consider seriously.
People who contend, with Mr. Fergusson, that the
rude stone monuments must have been put up in the
third and fourth centuries, because we know they
have not been built since, while they could not
have been erected by primeval savages, are simply
- without setting out on the argument consciously
- making smooth the path that conducts us back,
in search of an explanation, to a civilization
anterior to our own, the traces of which have all
but evaporated from the records from which, till
lately, we have been constructing the history of
the ancient world. Atlantis is the only rational
clue to the comprehension of Stonehenge, just as
it affords the only satisfactory solution of
ancient Egypt.
The information on the subject to be gathered
from those to whom the Memory of Nature is an
open book, shows us the dispersed adepts from
Atlantis as the founders in Western Europe of the
religious rites that Stonehenge was designed to
subserve. At a much later period than that which
witnessed the Atlantean migration to Egypt, some
representatives of the higher Atlantean occultism
established themselves in the country which, in
the subsequent changes of physical geography, was
destined to become the British Isles. Their
influence established a civilization among the
people which did not prove of the strong and
enduring character attaching to that planted in
Egypt, but which, nevertheless, gave rise to
considerable cities, all traces of which have now
passed away. And Stonehenge was erected as a
temple, in which the exoteric worship they taught
to the people could be carried on. It was never
covered with any roof. Its rude structure was
purposely adopted by the exiles from Atlantis as

a mute protest against the corrupt luxury of the
perishing civilization they had left behind. In
Atlantis itself the human family had touched the
nadir point of materiality. Great developments of
scientific knowledge had been turned entirely to
the service of the physical life, and spiritual
aspiration was entirely stifled in the pursuit of
material welfare. Personal luxury, cultivated by
those who were strong enough to secure it for
themselves, was the goal to which all the
energies of the race were bent. Many secrets of
Nature, which the science of this fifth race has
not yet recovered, were degraded to the exclusive
service of physical enjoyment by the dominant
classes - for an inferior, servile race also
inhabited the country - and the spiritual adepts
of the period turned with disgust from a
community which it was not in their power to
redeem. They set themselves the task of
implanting amongst a simpler and relatively
barbarous population abroad, whose descendants
were destined, in progress of time, to melt into
the next great race, the spiritual enthusiasm
that might, in their case, lead on to an ennobled
future. So the external ceremonies of the
religion they taught were carried on under
guidance with stern simplicity. They built their
great temple, of unhewn rocks. They sought no
architectural effects that would divert attention
from Nature. They invested their cathedral with
no other claims to admiration but those depending
on the massive grandeur of its proportions.
But how did they overcome the difficulty of
manipulating the huge masses of stone, the mere
superposition of which, one upon the other, seems
to have demanded mechanical resources which we
can hardly associate in imagination with any
period but our own? For that matter, in Atlantis
itself it may be found, when fuller light is
ultimately cast upon its history, that mechanical
resources of a very advanced order were available
for any work that needed them; but the builders

of that age were not exclusively dependent on
appliances of the kind we now make use of in
handling large masses of material. In the
maturity of Atlantean civilization some forces of
Nature, now only under the control of adepts in
occult science, were in general use. The adepts
of the time were under no obligation to keep the
secret of their existence jealously guarded; and
among them was that power, so rarely exercised
now that its very existence is scornfully derided
by the commonplace crowd - the power of modifying
the force we call gravity.
It is rarely of use in public utterances in the
present day, when current intelligence is engaged
in channels far removed from those of occult
attainment, to speak of adept powers that are
wholly out of gear with modern experience of
natural possibilities. But in reference to the
peculiar power to which I have just referred, the
truth is that the modification of the force of
gravity, by methods human ingenuity may bring
into play, can only seem absurd to people who are
ignorant of certain suggestive facts already
within the experience of scientific investigation
and, at the same time, wilfully blind to the
evidence of mysterious occurrences notoriously
taking place, though altogether unexplained so
far, in the realm of spiritualistic experience.
Theosophists are, of course, very far from
accepting the theories of spiritualism in regard
to the destinies of the human soul after death;
but the external facts, familiar to the
investigators of spiritualism, are facts none the
less which must be fitted into their places in
any conceptions of Nature framed by intelligent
reasoning. The foolish crowd ignore these,
because impostors are constantly detected in
imitating by trickery the comparatively rare
phenomena which, under the auspices of spiritual
mediumship, illustrate the occasional activity of
forces that set at defiance the very limited
knowledge of natural secrets generally diffused

amongst us at present. But the remark attributed
to Galileo, e pur si muove, is highly applicable
in this case. In face of all that has been
recorded by qualified spiritualistic
investigators - a body of testimony which is not
affected in the smallest degree by exposures of
sham spiritualism in other cases - it is
curiously illustrative of the capacities of human
stupidity, that people, fancying themselves
clear-headed and sagacious, should continue to
discredit the fact that, at spiritual séances,
heavy objects are sometimes "levitated," caused,
that is, to rise or even float about in the air
under the influence of invisible agencies,or
forces that have for the time being counteracted,
as far as such objects are concerned, the usually
operative force called gravity.
But that which happens only now and then, no
matter how rarely, must be traceable, if only we
knew enough, to the operation of some law as
natural as that under which steam expands. Nor is
there anything in the essence of the matter more
mysterious in the fact that solid objects are
sometimes repelled from the earth - or levitated
- than in the other fact that more usually they
are attracted. No modern physicist has as yet any
glimmering conception as to why or how gravity
works. We are no better informed at this moment
than Newton as to why the apple falls. We can, to
a certain extent, measure the force which
controls it; we do not know what that force is.
So with magnetism. There we have an agency we can
observe in action both ways - as an attractive
and as a repulsive force. Stimulate an electromagnet in one way and it will attract iron;
stimulate it in another way and it will repel
copper, so that a mass of that metal may be
visibly levitated and kept floating on nothing,
apparently, at some height above the apparatus
repelling it. Electricians observe and can
reproduce the fact; they do not understand it.
The levitation of tables and human beings at

spiritual séances can only be observed
occasionally and cannot be reproduced at will not by ordinary observers, at all events - but
the fact has to be faced by reasonable men, and
brought into relation with our general thinking.
It is stupid to attempt an escape from the
difficulty of not understanding it by declaring,
in spite of the evidence, that the fact is not a
fact.
When, therefore, theosophists learn from those
among them in a position to become acquainted
with the powers exercised by the adepts of occult
science, that such persons can in the present
day, as of old, modify the action of the force we
call gravity, so as to levitate ordinarily heavy
objects like masses of stone, there ought not to
be any indignant revolt of the understanding
against such a statement. As yet it is impossible
to offer the ordinary reader direct evidence to
that effect of a kind that is calculated to
compel his belief. But the general situation, as
I have shown, is such that any positive
declaration of disbelief in the allegation can
only be due to ignorance or stupidity. Therefore,
we who have what we hold to be trustworthy
information on the matter may at least put it
forward, very careless of scoffing, which, in
view of collateral knowledge now available,
stands self-condemned as irrational. The adept
custodians of that knowledge, concerning the
mysteries of Nature, which is filtering into the
world at large by degrees as science advances,
can and always have been able to control the
attractions of matter in such a way as to alter
the effective weight of heavy bodies at will.
That is the whole explanation of the marvels of
megalithic architecture. Working under the
guidance and with the help of the adepts from
Atlantis, the builders of Stonehenge, and of the
ancient "dolmen" altars found the enormous masses
of stone they used light enough to be handled
with facility. Clairvoyant observers of

Stonehenge have seen the process of its
construction going on. The pictures of its
progress are all indelibly imprinted on the
Memory of Nature: they are visible now, as
plainly as the actual transactions were visible
for those who were present. And the vision shows
us the enormous masses of the trilithons being
raised to their places with the help of
scaffoldings, no more substantial in their
character than would be used to day in the
erection of a brick cottage.
Of course, although I did not interrupt my
narrative of the origin of the pyramids to say
so, the great stones of which they are composed
were treated in the same way as the materials of
Stonehenge. The adepts who directed their
construction facilitated the process by the
partial levitation of the stones used. This is
the simple, though in one way no doubt deeply
mysterious, explanation of the old-world
monuments in which enormous masses of stone are
employed. At the temple of Baalbec, in Syria,
there are single stones built into the walls,
each of which is calculated to weigh about 1,500
tons. Preferring an explanation of such remains
which only seem reasonable because it makes no
appeal to forces and powers with which we are
unacquainted, archæologists have hitherto been
content to assume that, with an unlimited command
of human labour, the builders of such temples as
that of Baalbec may have been able to get their
great stones dragged along causeways on rollers,
and may somehow have hoisted them up into their
places with the help of inclined planes. Such
hypotheses make larger drafts upon credulity
really than those involved in the occult
statement. They call upon us to believe that
which is physically impossible; but the
impossibility is acceptable because it is
disguised in commonplace phraseology. Stonehenge
and Baalbec really stand before us imperishable
proofs that, in the age of their construction,

whenever that may have been, the world was
witness of an engineering which did not
accomplish its triumphs by brute strength, but by
the application of a finer knowledge than even
modern engineering has as yet recovered.
I have said that it was at a much later period
than that at which the Atlantean adepts, who
first left the perishing continent, took up their
residence in Egypt, that those who settled in
Western Europe set on foot the grand and simple
spiritual worship which Stonehenge in the first
instance was employed to subserve. It was at a
much later period even that that at which the
pyramids were erected. I do not know whether
there was any long residence by Atlantean adepts
in Western Europe prior to the introduction of
their teaching among the people. Probably there
was, but, at all events, it was near the final
culmination of the great Atlantean continent's
submergence, about 100,000 years ago from the
present time, that the grey stones still standing
on Salisbury Plain were first established in
their places. Among the facts concerning them,
which supporters of Fergusson's grotesque theory
have to pass over very lightly, is one which
relates to the geological character of the stones
used. The outer circle and the stones of the
great trilithons are of a composition that
suggest their derivation from quarries in the
neighbourhood. But the inner circle and the altar
stone are of a totally different formation, of a
kind which cannot be identified with any rockbeds
in that part of England. Such stone is to be
found in Cornwall, in Wales, and in Ireland, but
nowhere nearer. So from one of these regions the
materials of the inner circle must certainly have
been brought. Reasoning of the kind that is never
shocked by an absurdity, but is only offended by
the suggestion that modern knowledge does not
embrace all the capacities of Nature, is content
complacently to suppose that the Stonehenge
builders brought the massive materials in

question across many hundred miles of primeval
forest-covered country, or, by sea - all for the
sake of a battle memorial on Salisbury Plain when abundant stone, just as good and durable,
was to be had in the neighbourood. The nature of
the Stonehenge materials would be alone enough to
make the Arthurian theory ridiculous, even if it
would bear consideration along other lines of
attack. For the purposes of a mystic temple,
however, everyone who has a glimmering of occult
knowledge will apprehend that there may have been
considerations connected with those subtle
attributes of different kinds of stone, which
occultists generally call their magnetism, that
would prescribe the employment of more than one
kind.
The worship of the early Druids, to give that
name to the occult teachers who made Stonehenge
their headquarters, was grandiose and simple.
There were processions and chaunts and symbolical
ceremonies associated with astronomical events,
especially with the rising of the sun on
Midsummer Day, when great crowds of people
assembled to witness the sun's rays, at the
moment of his rising, shoot through an opening
opposite to the altar, and illuminate the sacred
stone. There were no unholy sacrifices offered on
the altar in those days, and the only external
ceremony of a sacrificial nature that took place
had to do with a libation of milk that was poured
over the stone. In accordance with the elaborate
symbolism of early occult rites, a great deal of
importance was attached to the serpent as an
emblem of multifarious significance, and as the
adept Druids could easily control these
creatures, an actual living serpent was made to
glide up into the altar stone at the sunrise
ceremony, and lap the milk. There is some truth,
but much more misconception, in prevailing
notions concerning what is called the "Serpent
Worship" of olden times. The failure of modern
students of religion to discriminate between

worship and use of symbols has to do with graver
misconceptions even than those which have
entangled the commonplace interpretations of
serpent worship.
The chief Druid of the Stonehenge ceremonies in
the days of the pure worship in the beginning
used to march in some of the processions with a
live serpent round his neck. Later on, when the
adept influence was no longer present - many
milleniums later - the degraded chiefs of the
Druid decadence used to keep up the old tradition
in so far as it lay in them to do so, but for
prudential reasons wore a dead serpent - a more
fitting emblem than they supposed of the state of
faith they represented. Lower and lower its
practices became debased, until the once sacred
altar stone was deluged no longer with milk, but
with the blood of human victims, and this was the
only sort of Druid worship of which, through
Roman historians, we have any written records.
How did it happen that so terrible a change came
on? The age apparently, as far as ancient Britain
was concerned, was not sufficiently advanced to
provide the earlier adepts with a continuous line
of successors. Eventually, it is to be presumed,
one by one, no doubt, the earlier adepts ceased
to incarnate among the people they could not lead
on to the path of true spiritual progress. In
Egypt the graft they planted took a firm hold of
the stock to which it was attached. In Britain it
did not, and thus, while Egypt remained to a
comparatively recent period a land of high
civilization, and one of the principal centres of
fifth-race adeptship, Britain relapsed back into
barbarism. Up to only a few thousand years before
the Roman conquest it remained still faintly
tinged with the remote traditions of its
vanishing civilization, then it sank to its
lowest condition of decay before the commencement
of its modern cycle of progress within the
historic period.

This sweeping survey of a past that will be more
fully recalled, no doubt, in progress of time, as
the world learns to better appreciate the inner
faculties of man, slight and sketchy though it
may be, has only been rendered possible by much
patient gleaning on my part, opportunities being
made use of as they arose. It is possible at a
later date that I may be able to fill up some
details, but I hope the imperfect suggestions of
this essay may meanwhile be accepted as
contributing in some measure to show how
imperatively necessary it is to bring the
Atlantean origin of all civilizations belonging
to our age into the scheme of our thinking, if we
are to hope for anything resembling a correct
interpretation of the ancient world.

THEOSOPHICAL TEACHINGS LIABLE TO BE
MISUNDERSTOOD
IN the beginning of our theosophical studies we
had to be content with very crude conceptions
concerning the great ideas to which we were then
introduced. It was not possible for those who
were endeavouring to teach us to convey to us,
all at once, a comprehension of those higher
planes of nature some understanding of which is
absolutely necessary to a correct appreciation of
even some fundamental principles that we have to
deal with. Indeed, that embarrassment has, it
seems to me, impeded all attempts at metaphysical
thought that have antedated the theosophical
movement. Intensely keen intellectual activity
has been devoted to the effort to penetrate "the
Veil of Isis," to outstrip the range of physical
senses, to determine the nature of matter, and to
analyze process of thought. But it has all
amounted to very little as compared with the
flood of significant teaching that we have been
able to obtain during the theosophical period.
With the help of this, by degrees, it has come to
pass that, in spite of the enormous difficulty of
grappling in imagination with conditions of
consciousness outside those with which we are
familiar, we have gradually been able to surround
some of the earlier teaching with illumination
which invests it with fuller meaning than we
could attach to it at first. We have thus come to
realize that some of our earlier conceptions,
though not erroneous - indeed, no teaching that I
have had to do with, as given to us in the
beginning, need at this later date be withdrawn
as erroneous - were incomplete to that extent
that they have given rise to misunderstandings;
and the attempt to clear up some of those
misunderstandings is the task on which I am now
venturing to enter.
Foremost amongst theosophical teachings liable to

be misunderstood - for want of adequate
comprehension concerning conditions of life
hereafter and on higher planes - stands that
fundamental idea, Reincarnation, the great law
which from earliest beginnings of theosophical
study we have realized as an essential principle
of evolution. Not only among theosophists has the
idea been appreciated. It is even surprising,
considering how much there is in the idea to
excite repugnance on the part of people who do
not understand it properly, that it has made way
to the extent that we have seen, gradually
conquering acceptance more widely than
theosophical teaching does this generally. It has
frequently been defended in pulpits as not
incompatible with ordinary religious teaching; it
has been accepted by people quite outside the
range of theosophical influence, as the only
possible explanation of what seems terrible
injustice reigning in the world - the mysterious
inequalities of condition that we see around us,
the differences not merely of welfare, but of
moral and intellectual development, of
environment, and so forth, which render human
life so painfully variegated. But theoretical
acceptance of the idea has not always rendered it
welcome to people who want to realize precisely
how the law will work when they come to be
reincarnated, who are troubled with anxieties in
that way that render the whole conception
exceedingly repulsive. They persist in thinking
of themselves as plunged afresh into babyhood, as
coming back with the consciousness they are now
invested with, to be again subject to the
appalling limitations of the infant conditon.
They think of themselves as fretting against the
limitations of the baby state, wearingly enduring
their slow progress towards maturity. We have to
get rid of all such ideas absolutely and entirely
before we understand what reincarnation means,
and the first difficulty in the way of getting
rid of them, has to do with the distinction
between the personality of any given life and the

Ego of which that personality is a temporary
expression.
As we approach an understanding of this
distinction a new difficulty is apt to spring up.
When told that the personality of any given life
is going to be merged in the Ego - as we are
definitely assured will be the case as a rule to the extent that the details of the last life
will fade by degrees from memory, that seems to
imply something resembling the annihilation of
personal consciousness, the only kind which seems
real, as contemplated from the physical plane
point of view. The same comfortless thought
surrounds a mistaken conception that has
sometimes been put forward in regard to the
ultimate destinies of humanity at the conclusion
of the Manvantara, the alleged re-absorption in
that Divinity out of which in the beginning
humanity emerged. Of course, if personalities
even remotely resembling what they are now were
absorbed into Divinity, as a drop of water is
absorbed in the ocean, that would be equivalent
to annihilation, and mergence in the Ego when the
personality is passing on from this life to
another seems, again, a species of annihilation,
for most people unable to escape, in imagination,
from the conditions of the current personality.
Now what we have to remember, first of all, in
order to get rid of that misconception, is that
protracted and vivid conditions of life intervene
between the disappearance from this plane of any
given personality and the next presentation of
the Ego on the physical plane in accordance with
the law of rebirth. A very long interval elapses
before the personality with which we are
associated in any given life has accomplished its
mergence in the Ego. I have dealt to some extent
with that subject on former occasions, but it
requires continued attention. Remember that,
first of all, we have a considerably protracted
experience, which may extend to enormous length

sometimes - of life in which the personality is
maintained in full completeness on the higher
levels of the astral plane. In a large number of
cases people whose personalities have been highly
evolved, and who represented great intellectual
development in this life, elect to remain on the
higher levels of the astral plane for long after
the time when they might have passed on to
Manasic conditions, had they so chosen, because
under those conditions it is possible for them to
gather fresh knowledge along the line of their
previous work, and prepare themselves in their
next incarnation for much more extended
activities of a similar order. In a minor degree
the same explanation applies to people of less
advanced evolution, though we have to remember,
in trying to think out the conditions of future
life, that they vary to an almost illimitable
extent. It is difficult in attempting to
interpret any of these mysteries to make adequate
allowance for that. Whereas highly intellectual
people will elect to remain for a long time on
the higher level, people of lesser advancement
also, assuming that their lives have not been
very bad indeed, will long remain on levels where
life is exceedingly enjoyable, though not
necessarily in such cases very conducive to
further progress. But in all cases there comes a
time when, in fulfilment of the necessities of
further evolution, all the inhabitants of the
astral world must pass on to the Manasic
condition. We must not think of this passage as
in the nature of a second death. It is quite free
from all the anxieties and distrust that, to
often, embitter the approach of physical
dissolution, and it is hardly necessary to stay
utterly free from the suffering so often
attending departure from this plane. During
astral life a good many of the attributes that
contributed to make up the personality have faded
away. Its higher emotions, its love energies, its
intellectual capacities remain unimpaired, but it
has already shed most of the minor attachments

arising from its earthly life. It is getting
ready for that union with the Ego which must not
be thought of as accomplished at once on leaving
this plane of life. Whatever desires may have
been engendered for the continuance of personal
existence, those desires will operate to retain
vivid consciousness of personality on appropriate
levels of nature for as long as their force can
persist. But, as I say, the Ego, the real
permanent self, is a more permanent thing than
any one personality, and, however important any
given personality may be compared with those that
have preceded it in the long career of the Ego
through nature, its importance has to be
expressed in a new environment, to clear the way
for which the minor details of the last
incarnation have been allowed to fade away, or
evaporate. But the Ego and the personality must
not be thought of as two separate entities. The
personality is, at all events, a partial
expression of the Ego and, sooner or later, the
Earth-plane consciousness is withdrawn into the
Ego, sometimes rapidly, sometimes after a long
interval, but eventually in all case that has to
be accomplished. And the blending means the
absorption into the Ego of all that was important
in the personality that has lately been spent.
There is another interesting thought connected
with that idea. Sooner or later a personality may
become so important that it is perpetuated, so to
speak, and invests the Ego with its own
colouring, instead of assuming from the Ego the
colouring of former accumulated experiences.
That, of course, will only happen at the
threshold of a very exalted condition of
development, and it does not apply to the
majority of people at the present stage of our
life.
I must now go back for a moment to the
misunderstanding about baby consciousness. It is
quite possible that some of you may have read

accounts of strange experiences that have
sometimes been known in the Eastern world - I am
thinking especially of some cases in Tibet where babies who have been recognized as
reincarnations of a former incarnation have
actually been able to prove their identity by
pointing out hiding places in which the former
personality had stowed away various objects, with
a view to its ultimate identification. And, in
some cases, the actual baby form has uttered
words identifying itself with the former
incarnation. That need not be thought of as
conflicting with what I just now said. Whenever
that has taken place - and I believe it has taken
place; I do not want to repudiate the stories it would represent a great adept achievement from
the background, so that it may be set aside
altogether as inapplicable to ordinary life. And
almost equally inapplicable to ordinary life are
the cases in which very young children, before
the age of seven, have been known to exhibit
extraordinary faculties. I think these have
generally had to do with the reincarnation of
great musicians. We are all familiar with the
precocity of Mozart, who is said to have begun
playing the piano at six years of age. In
reference to these one can only say again that
they are altogether abnormal. Merely guessing at
the previous conditions that might explain such
cases, I would suggest that they represent an
intense eagerness on the part of the Ego to
express, on the physical plane, some of the
musical ideas gathered from experience on the
Manasic level. We have always been led to believe
that on the Manasic level music somehow pervades
the whole region, appealing, of course, in very
varying degrees to different aptitudes, but
filling the consciousness of the advanced
musician with musical ideas he would be eager to
reproduce. Probably in a similar way, when the
mathematical faculty has become the leading
mental characteristic of an Ego, that condition
may equally impel the Ego to seek an early

opportunity for its expression on the physical
plane, and may account for the "calculating
boys" one has sometimes heard of; though we have
in connection with such cases to explain, the
best we can, the usual fact that the abnormal
faculty disappears or weakens as the boy grows
up. Such facts bring us into relation with a
great volume of Nature's mysteries, which show
how, at early stages of evolution, there seems to
be a closer connection with the spiritual plane
than when fuller intellectual development has
been reached. Babies, animals, and early savage
tribes will sometimes give evidence of possessing
glimmerings, at all events, of astral perception
which fade away at later stages of growth.
I come now to consider various possibilities
which have to do with the re-attachment of the
Ego to a bodily manifestation. In the case of
Egos sufficiently advanced along the path of that
progress to which knowledge is so conducive, it
may be possible for the higher self, if I may use
that expression, or the Ego - I am using the two
terms as almost synonymous - to exercise a
definite choice in regard to the new incarnation
on which it will enter. People already at some
stage "on the path," especially if they are
called upon to return rather sooner than the
ordinary law would provide for, would probably
have a considerable range of choice in regard to
the incarnation they would accept. I have been
priviliged to obtain some information bearing
upon cases that have actually occurred, and a
curious discovery emerges. In all such cases of
which I have heard, where several opportunities
have lain before an Ego coming into incarnation some apparently very much less attractive than
others - it seems almost invariably the case that
the Ego chooses the least desirable incarnation,
as its desirability would be measured from our
point of view. Incarnations in humble life
involving a great deal of what, from our point of
view, we should consider hardship and undesirable

conditions have continually, within my knowledge,
been chosen by people of sufficient advancement
to exercise a choice, in preference to those
representing more agreeable conditions of life on
this plane. From the Ego point of view nothing is
of really any importance compared with spiritual
growth and progress, and it may not infrequently
happen that the humbler incarnation is, first of
all, calculated to get rid of Karma that lies in
the background, while it also not infrequently
happens that the humbler incarnation is
distinctly more conducive to devotion to
spiritual thought and effort than those where
pleasures and distractions of all kinds keep
people's thoughts centred on the life that they
are actually leading. And again it may happen though I am now about to speak of a case that is
probably unique - that some definite work that a
highly evolved Ego has undertaken can be better
carried out in a humble than in an exalted
station of life. Most students of philosophical
literature will be more or less familiar with the
writings of that wonderful German philosopher
Jacob Boehme. Now Jacob Boehme's writings show
him to have been on the threshold, at all events,
of high Adeptship, and yet in that life he was a
humble cobbler, just a subordinate worker at that
humble trade. Why did he choose such an
incarnation as that? - for it is certain that a
Being on his level must have chosen his
incarnation. The answer I understand to be that
at the period in which he lived it was not
desirable that the teachings he had to put
forward - real theosophic teachings, though not
illustrated with the amplitude of detail we have
since been priviliged to obtain - should descend
upon the world from any altitude of authority.
Only a few were ripe for them. It was held to be
necessary that they should be suggested, so to
speak, from a humble level of mundane authorship.
I am not presuming to endorse or criticize that
idea. I merely state it as given to me in
explanation of the Jacob Boehme incarnation. "But

why," I asked, "such a very ignoble position as
that of a working cobbler?" The answer, I believe
derived from himself, was - "No position can be
ignoble in which you are fulfilling the purpose
of the Logos." That seems to me to have been an
extremely beautiful answer, radiant with meaning
that can be applied to many of the phenomena of
life. True, there are not many working cobblers
who are Jacob Boehmes in disguise, and we must
not be hurried into conclusions to the effect
that it is only on such levels of life that great
spiritual natures are to be sought for. Indeed,
the normal rule is rather the other way about.
There is a tendency in Nature to a gradual upward
drift in social station in the long progress of
incarnations. This ensues from the way in which
desire, in ordinary life, is one of the factors
making up the next Karmic programme. The desire
must be clear and definite to be operative in
this way, and it would not amount to much if a
costermonger desired to be a king. He would not
know enough about the king's life to desire that
with precision, nor even if his desire pointed to
a less exalted station could it be definite
enough to have a Karmic value. But he may fully
realize the conditions of life a little better
than those he might be used to, and then the
desire assumes creative force, always supposing
the man does not engender, in other directions,
bad Karma that conflicts with his desire. But all
these last remarks obviously apply to levels of
life below those inspired by genuine spiritual
aspiration. When this is sufficiently developed
for the Ego to feel it as his predominant motive,
it sweeps away all minor ambitions.
So, as I say, on the higher levels choice enters
into this matter. When it does not enter - which
is the case with the vast majority of our fellowcreatures - the guidance is accomplished again in
various ways. For those sufficiently advanced,
but not on the path, there are Divine beings in
the higher order of the great adept hierarchy

whose function it is to direct incarnations and
actually guide each Ego, with a perception of its
spiritual needs, into the incarnation suitable
for its further expression. On a lower level
again, if we go back to the conditions of savage
life, or even to the conditions of very humble
life in civilized countries - well, the truth is,
as I have definitely been told, for a great many
Egos, that anyone of fifty incarnations would do
equally well, and therefore there is no specific
individual guidance in such cases. You will
always remember that the human race is a vast
procession proceeding through the ages, the
members of which represent very different
conditions of growth and progress, very different
claims upon the authority which rules the whole.
Let us consider the course of events in the case
of an ordinary Ego representing civilized
development, a certain amount of progress along
the lines of evolution and intelligence, and so
forth, but no abnormal spiritual growth. Such an
Ego will be drafted into an appropriate
incarnation under pressure of forces of which it
has no practical consciousness, and for a long
time will be unconscious of having re-entered
this plane of life at all. There is a link
established between itself and the new life - we
do not know what terms to use, physical plane
nature does not enable us to handle phrases which
suit these conditions - but some mysterious
magnetic thread or tie attaches the Ego to the
new birth, and for a long time it is quite
unconscious of any such attachment - unconscious
probably for at least seven years. The first
seven years of a child's life do not represent
intelligent consciousness within that organism.
Perhaps that statement will shock enthusiastic
mothers who believe that from a very early age
they detect all sorts of charming attributes in
their offspring. They may, but I do maintain from
what I have been told that as far as the real Ego
consciousness is concerned it is not really
active within the child until at least seven

years have been spent, and then only to a very
limited degree. Then, no doubt, the Ego will be
conscious of its re-attachment to the physical
plane, but not conscious to any extent which is a
serious impediment to its spiritual consciousness
on higher planes. It will not be until another
septenary period has been passed - for these
septenary periods have a very definite
significance in connection with the growth of new
lives - it is not until another stage of distinct
progress has been accomplished that the etheric
and astral elements in the new child's
composition become identified with the Ego in the
background. I am not going to attempt a very
minute explanation of the successive stages
through which Nature works in bringing an Ego
into a new incarnation, but the two septenary
periods that I have mentioned are by no means all
that are recognizable as stages in the process.
The real truth I believe to be that it is not
until full maturity is reached, not till such an
age as twenty-eight, or even a later period than
that, that the highest elements in the Ego are
capable of functioning in the new organism. I
believe, even as far as the period of thirtyfive, it may sometimes be said that the new
incarnation is not absolutely in its completely
perfected condition. So that no conception of
this subject can be more wide of the truth than
that which embarrasses the idea of reincarnation
with the belief that, in the earlier stages, the
experience is distressing to the entity coming
back.
One or two other thoughts still remain to be
emphasized in connection with this process of
reincarnation. A great deal was said in earlier
writings on the subject of Devachan, and later
interpretations have modified without
contradicting what was said in the beginning.
There are numerous cases in which Devachan is
little more than a blissful idleness in which the
personality that has passed from this life into

the Devachan state, exists in a perfectly happy
condition for as long a period as the energies
created or brought into activity during the past
life are capable of manifesting themselves on a
higher plane. In all such cases the mergence into
the Ego is effected unconsciously. All such
processes are guided by higher intelligence
outside that of the Ego itself, and it would only
be in a very advanced condition indeed that the
Ego would be perfectly conscious of what it was
doing as it gradually absorbed into itself the
experiences of the last life. You have always to
remember that on the highest conditions that men
are capable of reaching we take our destinies
into our own hands; on intermediate conditions
they are guided for us by beings of a high order
in the hierarchy supervising human affairs, and
on much lower levels, what we may call the common
levels of nature, operating in a vast area, they
are guided for us by beings of a lower order in
the spiritual hierarchy.
A good deal was said in the beginning of our
studies in reference to the periods which usually
elapse between incarnations. In my own first book
on the subject, those who have read it may
remember that I spoke - under guidance of course
- of the intervening period which applied to the
average of mankind, as running from 1,500 to
2,000 years, during which, of course, life was
divided between astral conditions and Devachanic
or Manasic conditions. Only after this very ample
scope had been given for the exhaustion of all
the forces of the previous life did the entity
come back into incarnation. There was nothing
untrue in that statement at the time, but a very
remarkable condition of things has arisen since
that statement was put forward. We live in a very
remarkable period, remarkable not merely for its
extraordinary development of theosophical
knowledge amongst us in the world at large, but
in other ways as well, and amongst other features
that are remarkable in this period is the

extraordinary acceleration of all processes which
have to do with human evolution. I think we have
many of us noticed this acceleration as applied
to the phenomena of life around us, even in
reference to the changes that have been going on
on the physical plane. Looking back over the past
fifty years we see that immense progress has been
made in science, in discovery, in moral
development, in religious thought all over the
world; and that acceleration has been going on
with even greater rapidity and energy on the
higher planes of nature. It has to do, of course,
with the difference between the downward and the
upward arcs of evolution. On the downward arc of
evolution - the great preparatory process of
nature - progress is slow; on the upper arc of
the cycle it is quick, and we are beginning now,
having turned the corner as regards this world
period, to feel the accelerating influence of the
upward arc of evolution; and the accelerating
influence, I am told, has definitely operated
within the last thirty years, to accelerate the
return to incarnation of such people as we are
talking about when we speak of civilized
communities. I leave out of account those who are
on the Path; a condition that probably applies to
a good many of my readers, whether they are fully
aware of it or not, most likely to a majority of
those who take a real, deep and serious interest
in theosophical teaching. They come under the
operation of a new law altogether, and their
incarnation may be accelerated far beyond any
such periods as we have been talking about. But
dealing with the general run of civilized
mankind, the acceleration is producing this
effect: for a considerable number of advanced
Egos in the civilized world, a period of only
about three hundred years is now going to be an
average period for the intervening time between
lives. For a larger number representing, of
course, a somewhat less evolved condition of
either spiritual or intellectual growth, a seven
hundred year period is going to be the average,

and for probably a still larger number
representing normal conditions of ordinary life a
thousand year period is going to be the average
instead of that fifteen hundred year period which
prevailed during the earlier part of the last
century.
We all heard a great deal at the beginning of
theosophical work of the wonderful drift of
knowledge from the Eastern world to the West. Ex
oriente lux is the most familiar maxim connected
with theosophical study and one which represents
a profound truth. But as so many other things
have changed in the process of time, a change is
coming over the whole condition of what may
roughly be called the occult world in
incarnation. By that I mean the whole body of
people who are moving in the direction of higher
knowledge, who are gradually coming in
considerable numbers on to what we call the path
leading to the higher life, who are coming to
appreciate the openings of knowledge that have
been available for us in recent years. In former
times such people were more numerous in the
Eastern than in the Western world; and the
consequence used to be that incarnations drifted,
in the case of people with distinct spiritual
aspiration, from the Western world to the
Eastern. Indeed, when our theosophical teaching
began to excite interest here, I know that some
of my own friends aspired to Eastern incarnations
as probably conducive to more rapid spiritual
growth than could be accomplished in any other
way. That idea I think was an erroneous
aspiration so far as it applied to any people
within our own lifetime, though not erroneous in
times long gone by. But now it is distinctly out
of date. The drift of incarnation for those who
represent exalted conditions of preparedness for
higher things, is now rather from the East to the
West. The truth of the matter is that, although
we are so far only concerned with beginnings, the
Western world is going, in by no means a remote

future, to be the great radial centre from which
spiritual influence will spread over the
civilized world; and therefore, as I say, at the
present time such an aspiration as that which I
referred to a while ago as operative with some of
my earlier friends in connection with
theosophical study, the desire for Eastern
incarnations, is wholly out of date. What we have
to do now is to recognize the duties that are
gradually coming to be incumbent on the Western
world in connection with the spiritual progress
of mankind.
Looking back to the beginning of civilization, to
the Atlantean period, when there was not any
Europe to talk about at all, all the development,
such as it was, both spiritual and intellectual,
was centred in the Atlantean world. Of course the
Atlantean population gradually spread over the
whole of the habitable globe, and all that we now
speak of as the Eastern world was, please to
remember, once Atlantean. Earlier sub-races of
the Atlantean period accounted for the earliest
populations, whether of India, of any part of
Central Asia, or of any part of the Eastern
world, and as the spiritual civilization of
Atlantis became defiled by the growth of evil in
the shape of what we commonly call black
tendencies, so the best representatives of
advanced Atlantean spirituality migrated
eastward, and in that way established in the
Eastern world the great radiating centre of
spiritual energy in days gone by. And that
condition of things lasted for a very long while.
Of course at a period which again is a very long
while ago from our point of view, two or three
hundred thousand years ago, when Atlantean adepts
migrating from Atlantis proper to escape the evil
developments of its civilization, established
themselves in Egypt, they met another stream of
spiritual civilization flowing west-ward from
India and regions beyond India that had been
engendered, so to speak, by the fermentation of

loftier thought in the earlier races of the
Atlantean period. Thus when Atlantis ultimately
disappeared and was destroyed by reason of the
fact that it had become so utterly degraded, you
have to think of the Eastern world as wholly
representative of spiritual growth. But we also
have to recognize as an absolute fact that in the
progress of sub-racial development later subraces than any of those which now occupy the
Eastern world have been developed and evolved in
what is now the Western world. So now the great
wave of spirituality is sweeping back again
towards the West. Ex oriente lux! From the East
the light is coming. But the very use of that
phrase indicates that it is moving westward. Some
Western Americans are fond of a boastful
expression: "Westward the Star of Empires takes
its way." I am not concerned for the moment with
the Star of Empire - but westward the great
forces of spiritual energy and development are
distinctly moving. And we have to be worthy, as
it were, of that condition of things; we have to
rise to meet it.
If we properly appreciate our functions, they are
much more dignified than at the first glance
people believe. The Theosophical Society is
charged with the great task of leading spiritual
progress in the Western world. The Society is a
nucleus which in future generations, at no very
distant period, will be enormously expanded
beyond its present conditions, expanded let us
trust by virtue of the fact that those who are
now concerned with it will appreciate the duties
incumbent on them, and act in a manner which may
pave the way for that further development which
undoubtedly is contemplated by Higher Powers as
the programme of the future. That can be carried
out if we can respond adequately to the influence
that they are radiating.
That is the most important thought that I have to
deal with just now, but there are one or two

other minor matters having to do with
misconceptions or misunderstandings of
theosophical teaching, which seem trivial and
almost trumpery compared with those which I have
been talking about, but which none the less claim
notice. I am referring to views which are
sometimes put forward, connecting aspirations for
spiritual growth and progress with questions
relating to what we eat and drink or refrain from
eating and drinking. Now this is a very delicate
subject which has been a good deal discussed by
theosophical writers lately, and in reference to
which I am very anxious not to be misunderstood
myself by theosophical friends. No one can
entertain a more definitely appreciative
admiration for what may roughly be called
superior or cleaner modes of life, as compared
with those of the multitude, that I myself; but I
do venture to say - and I say it on authority
that I respect - that however beautiful in its
conception purer diet may be, that "perfect way
in diet" that Mrs. Kingsford so admirably wrote
about many years ago has nothing to do with
spiritual progress. That is all that I am driving
at. Do not let people who, whether for reasons of
health, conveninence, family environment, or for
any other reasons worthy of consideration, find
it difficult to adopt the rules of the perfect
way in diet - do not let them suppose that in any
way they are prejudicing their spiritual growth
by disregarding them. That is all I am
emphasizing. The all-important consideration in
regard to physical life - I am not speaking now
of the moral attributes that should guide our
conduct in life - our all-important duty in
regard to the physical instrument with which we
have to work when we are trying to do the right
thing in this life, is that we should keep it in
health. And at the present time, when most of our
bodies - not our Egos, but most of our bodies may have come down through a line of heredity
familiarized with the old-fashioned diet, it does
not always happen that the present

representatives of that line can be healthy on an
entirely new régime. That is the important point
to remember. Your duty, so to speak, to the body
is to keep it in health, and you must determine
for yourself what particular course of life in
regard to this matter of eating and drinking is
best calculated to have that effect. I have made
efforts to get information on this subject from
exalted teachers. I think I have succeeded, and
of course what I have been saying to you is the
outcome of such success. Going more into detail,
it may be recognized that in a certain very
limited sense it is true that what, for want of a
better term, we call "magnetism" of a bad order
does attach to meat as a food. It has a very
slight influence, and I am told that those who
look on from a higher plane at the efforts of
some vegetarian thinkers to follow the perfect
way in diet, are rather amused to see that they
ignore this question of magnetism as between
various kinds of vegetable food. If there is any
point in the idea that certain foods have a bad
magnetism, then certain kinds of vegetable foods
have a bad magnetism to just the same extent as
meat, and in neither case does that matter
seriously. The same applies to alcohol with
slightly greater emphasis. And again the question
is whether physical heredity is of such an order
as to render any particular body incapable of
maintaining health and efficiency for whatever
work it has to do, without some little of that
otherwise undesirable beverage.
One other theory claims notice in this connection
- that which relates to the habit of smoking. Let
nobody be under the impression - if they are
inclined to attach any importance to the
information I have been priviliged to obtain that there is any harm in that practice in regard
to the conditions it engenders in the physical
body, in reference to health, to spiritual or
moral progress, or to any of the loftier duties
of life. It is perfectly harmless; it has no bad

effect on astral or etheric conditions - in
moderation of course. We always assume that we
are talking to people who are not going to
extremes in the pursuit of any pleasures of a
physical order. But within reasonable limits that
particular practice, I am told, has a rather
beneficial effect than otherwise on the etheric
conditions of people who live in modern
communities, full of astral swirls of all kinds
and of a complicated order. There remains only
one other remark to make on this subject, that of
course in reference to smoking, however agreeable
and innocent it may be in itself, nobody who is
thinking along the lines that are probably
operative with theosophical students would dream
of doing anything of that kind in a manner which
would be disagreeable to others. That is the clue
to the correct understanding of this matter. It
hinges on to very much loftier principles,
because the idea that we should do nothing for
our own sake which is injurious to the comfort or
welfare of other people is a crude way of putting
the fundamental conception which has to do with
spiritual progress in all its aspects. We are not
segregated atoms in consciousness, living only
for our individual selves; we are simply parts of
a stupendous design, the identity of ourselves
with which at some future period we shall fully
realize, as we may now even intellectually
appreciate it. That idea can never be
misunderstood, because of its utter simplicity.
Simple on this plane, it is equally simple and
equally true on planes above, and is the one idea
which, if it thoroughly saturates our
understanding, and becomes the guide of life and
action, will render people theosophists in the
truest acceptation of the term.

THE SUPER-PHYSICAL LAWS OF NATURE
TO speak of the change which has come over the
public mind, or that portion of the public mind
which represents the advanced culture of the
period, as a movement of thought, is, in truth,
to use an inadequate expression, for that
movement is largely due to an inflow of new
knowledge and information concerning the superphysical mysteries of nature, which were not at
the disposal of those who, in the middle of the
last century, represented the incredulity which
then prevailed in reference to all matters having
to do with mystic research. Those of us whose
memories stretch back to the middle of the last
century will remember how determined and
contemptuous that incredulity generally was. To
attain any knowledge concerning super-physical
states of human consciousness was held to be
eternally impossible. Sporadic phenomena,
reported from time to time as indicating that it
might be possible to obtain communication with
the surviving consciousness of people who had
departed this life, were treated as though of
necessity they represented imposture and fraud.
Stories of clairvoyance, and records of curious
results obtained by mesmerism, fortune-telling,
in all its curious varieties, whether concerned
with cards, palmistry, or astrology, and all the
confused traditions of medieval magic, were
lumped up together as representing ignorant
superstition. The Science of the period, dealing
exclusively with the phenomena of matter - with
theories that could be substantiated by physical
experiment - was enthroned in public esteem, not
merely, as it deserved, by reason of representing
a magnificent development of human intelligence,
but as expressive of finality in regard to human
knowledge; not finality along the lines of its
own activity, but finality as regards the
character of such knowledge, held to be
necessarily limited by the resources of physical
sense. Philosophy even, vaguely conscious of

something beyond the characteristics of matter,
did not hesitate to describe whatever lay beyond
the reach of physical research as "unknowable,"
and those who ventured to attempt the exploration
of the unseen or intangible mysteries of Nature,
did so at the expense of being treated with
contempt by the orthodox opinion of their time.
But without stopping to trace the steps by which
the great change has been brought about, what is
the actual state of things which we have now to
recognize as distinguishing the thought of our
own period? To begin with, those who feel
themselves in possession of certain knowledge to
the effect that it is possible to communicate
with those who have been passed on to other
states of existence, are to be counted by
millions both in Europe and America. Their
conviction does not imply that it is always
possible to command such communication in
individual cases. The laws relating to all such
methods are, as yet, but imperfectly understood;
but the broad certainty that, under some
circumstances, such communication is possible, is
enough to establish the main principle that human
consciousness survives the change called death,
and it is impossible to overrate the value of the
widespread conviction to that effect permeating
our civilization, in which the progress of
physical science was tending in the opposite
direction, while the influence of religious
teaching was insufficient to counteract that
tendency. Concurrently with the growth of
confidence in the main idea represented by
spiritualism, the various manifestations of
Nature's finer forces operative amongst those
still in physical life have been steadily
securing attention. Psychic research became, by
degrees, not merely emancipated from the
intolerance it formerly encountered, but has been
gradually established amongst us as almost a
fashionable pursuit. Mesmerism, so fiercely
flouted in the beginning, became recognized, in

some of its aspects, at all events, as a curative
agent in some conditions of disease, and though
ill-understood as yet by those who only know it
under the modern and misleading designation
"hypnotism," is actually recognized as a system
of treatment by many orthodox practitioners. And,
sharing in the growing changes of opinion, the
fascination of fortune-telling in all its
varieties has proved only too attractive to many
enthusiasts of our generation. Finally we have to
recognize that in the scientifc world itself, a
few, at all events, of those most distinguished
in research, and many indeed beside those who
have had the courage to acknowledge their
conviction, are conscious already that they are
standing on the threshold of a new scientifc
dispensation, in which super-physical laws and
super-physical faculties must be made available
by those whose destiny it may be to expound the
natural philosophy of the future. Problems
connected with the ether, the electron, and
unseen emanations from the Sun, credited with the
production of those curious phenomena known as
magnetic storms, are all of them imperatively in
need of illumination of a kind that can only be
derived from super-physical investgation. The
present situation is full of promise for
developments, at no distant future, which will
involve in the embrace of recognized science the
resources and achievements of occultism.
That is the change that has taken place within
the last five and twenty or thirty years. Beyond
the influence of spiritualism, to which I have
already referred, what are the other influences
which have brought it about?
I am not eager to claim credit in any exclusive
degree or to any predominant extent for the
literature which, within the period to which I
refer, has been devoted to the exposition of that
teaching generally known as Theosophy, but it
would be affectation to suppose that the change

has not been attributable, in some measure, to
the wide diffusion of that clearly-defined,
coherent, scientific interpretation of a vast
body of natural law relating to human evolution
which the literature of Theosophy has put at the
disposal of the cultured world since that system
of teaching was first formulated in approximate
detail. Whether it has been the cause or the
effect of the great change in modern thought
which I have been endeavouring to trace, no one
who has adequately studied theosophical teaching
will deny that for the first time in the overt
history of human enlightenment it presents us
with a complete theory of life; reaching back to
its beginnings, reaching forward to its
possibilities, and incidentally foreshadowing the
ultimate synthesis into a complete science of
super-physical nature, of all the miscellaneous
phenomena with which psychic research is
concerned. Spiritualism established the reality
of a future life, but aimed, I venture to think,
as regards its original inspiration, at nothing
more. Occult research, independently of
spiritualism, has established the fact that human
consciousness, still expressed in incarnation,
has resources at its disposal far transcending in
their significance the senses of the physical
body. Theosophy, accepting and interpreting these
conclusions, has illuminated, for our benefit,
the whole scheme of human evolution, the laws
governing spiritual progress, the possibilities
awaiting mankind in a remote future, the
continuity of life in successive manifestations
on this physical plane of existence, and the
growth of the soul, under the influence of the
experience which those successive manifestations
afford. No hurried phrases of this nature can
adequately convey to minds, as yet unfamiliar
with the literature of Theosophy, a complete
comprehension of its sublime significance. But in
truth the teaching itself, when properly
understood, enables us to realize that everyone
who aspires sooner or later to realize the

potentialities of human progress, must absorb
that teaching into his consciousness as a
necessary preparation for the efforts he will be
called upon to make, in connection with his
ulterior development.
This statement may seem extravagant, but will be
readily appreciated by those who have studied,
with any degree of earnestness, the fundamental
principles of human evolution rendered apparent
by the teaching of the Higher Occultism. Ignoring
detail, we are able to perceive the whole scheme
of human evolution as divided into two mighty
halves, during the first of which the forces of
Nature carry forward the human Ego to a stage of
development fairly represented by the average
culture of our own time. But the subtle forces
generated by the Ego itself are essential to the
ulterior progress during the second great half of
the evolutionary period, and these cannot be
brought into activity without a clear
comprehension of the design they are intended to
subserve. To the half-way period of the whole
journey, Nature brings us without claiming any
help from ourselves; the next half of the journey
can only be accomplished by the union of our own
enlightened will with the forces which Nature
will still contribute to assist us in our upward
growth.
The phrase I have employed as the title of this
essay may not at once be intelligible, but if I
had not shrunk from expanding it to inconvenient
length, I should have rendered it more
unintelligible still by employing the words used
with a double signification, proposing to deal,
not merely with the super-physical aspect of
natural forces, but also with the natural aspect
of super-physical forces. The inversion of the
phrase may not at once convey a specific meaning,
but I venture to think that before I have done
its significance will be clearly appreciated, and
in order that what I have to say may be at once

intelligible in its bearing on the main idea, let
me explain very concisely at the outset the
conclusions I shall endeavor to reach.
I want to show, first of all, that the forces
with which we are all familiar, in their
relationship with matter, the laws of Nature as
they are commonly called, can only be correctly
understood if we think of them as the expression
of Divine Will consciously operating to produce
the effects we observe, and, secondly, that while
the effects we observe, in connection with the
consequences of action - with all that has to do
with our appreciation of right and wrong, good
and evil, and moral principle - can readily
enough be associated with the idea of Divine
will, embodying sanction or disapproval, they are
none the less to be recognized as a vast
department of natural law, which, though dealing
with resources of a super-physical nature beyond
the reach of experimental research, constitute
none the less a department of natural law as
uniform and definite as those which have to do
with the behaviour of matter.
We find ourselves in this world, under conditions
which enable us to recognize it as an arena of
spiritual evolution; but it is even more
obviously an arena of a complicated system of law
relating to physical matter, and in reference to
this great body of law we may even extend our
observation beyond the limits within which, as a
rule, I think it wise to confine our attention.
In presence of attempts sometimes made to
interpret or speculate concerning the origin and
Divine government of the whole universe, I have
often ventured to suggest that it is unwise to do
more than endeavour to comprehend the origin and
purpose of our Solar System. At the best, in
reference to that, we can never hope to do more
than obtain fragmentary conceptions, and dimly to
picture in the mind the story of its origin and
the theory of its final perfection. But in

reference to physical law we are enabled to
perceive that the code which is manifestly
operative in the Solar System is certainly, to
some extent - possibly in its entirety applicable to the innumerable systems distributed
through the infinitudes of space. It is certain,
for example, that the fundamental law of
gravitation, governing all masses of matter
within our view, is also operative in distant
systems of a wholly different order where a dual
or multiple system of Suns can be distinctly
observed as obedient to the law which governs the
motion of our own planets in their orbits. And
beyond this the resources of spectroscopic
observation enable us to identify, in distant
Suns, some of the varieties under which matter
manifests to us in our laboratories, and to
speculate, not unreasonably, on the probability
that the so-called chemical elements with which
we are acquainted here are also the materials of
which distant Solar Systems are constructed, and
which, most probably, are obedient in such
systems to the same laws of chemical affinity
that we are enabled to investigate in handling
those elements on earth. The value of this
observation has to do, of course, with the manner
in which it tends to suggest an otherwise
unrecoginizable unity in the whole cosmos, even
if it is hardly profitable for us to pursue that
idea much farther. But whether we think of the
natural laws affecting matter in their cosmic or
in their more limited aspect, we cannot but be
equally driven to the conclusion that the Divine
Power, which builds up definite worlds and
systems, impresses on the complex organisms thus
created the characteristics they exhibit when the
creation is accomplished.
Along the lines of ordinary astronomical
speculation, as also by the light of esoteric
teaching, we are enabled to formulate a broad
conception of the manner in which the worlds of a
system like our own are built up by the

aggregation in the first instance of relatively
homogenous matter available throughout space.
Astronomy deals with the development of Suns and
planets, from nebulæ; occult teaching follows
along somewhat the same path, though going back a
little earlier in the story, and recognizing the
formation of the nebulæ as the result of Divine
Will operating on the infinite expanse of etheric
substance. But whether we imagine that by virtue
of laws pervading the Universe, etheric matter
when aggregated into physical molecules is
inherently invested with the power of endowing
those molecules with the attributes we recognize
in the chemical elements, or whether we imagine a
Will which, by the first hypothesis, emanates
from some cosmic influence, to be reproduced by
the will of the Divine Power to which our system
is directly due, the same conclusion emerges from
either hypothesis. The attributes of matter,
constituting in their entirety that which we
describe as the laws of Nature, are the
expression of Divine Will, either consciously
operating throughout the Universe directly, or
indirectly passed on through the will of the
Divine Beings to whom the existence of each Solar
System is due. And apart from the general force
of reasonable speculation along these lines, I
have been incidentally assured that clairvoyant
observation of a high order will confirm this
conclusion in a curious and interesting way.
To render this suggestion intelligible we must
remember, of course, that wherever we speak of
Divine Will operating in regions of Nature within
our own purview, we have to understand that it
operates through a vast hierarchy of subordinate
agency. Such agency has, of course, to be
recognized as associated with varieties of
spiritual evolution quite independent of the
human kingdom; and in dealing with these, we are,
of course, moving through a region of thought in
which manifestation is obscure, and observation
extremely difficult. But none the less, I have

know it to be asserted by qualified observers
whom I have been disposed to trust, that where
important resarches, connected with some of the
great laws of Nature, have been in progress,
beings of some super-human order have actually
been present, watching or perhaps guiding the
progress of human enlightenment in connection
with the departments of Nature it is their duty
to preside over. If this be actually the case, it
serves to emphasize the main idea with which I am
at present concerned, the direct bearing of
conscious will on the laws of matter, which, at
cruder stages of human thought, the science of
the period contrived to regard as compatible with
an atheistic contempt for all conceptions
relating to a Divine origin. That worship of
matter per se which characterized a certain
variety of scientific thought, in the last
century, is no less ludicrously discredited by
the illuminated intelligence represented by the
Higher Occultism, than the equally crude
conception of primitive theology which, while
certainly recognizing Divine Power as a factor in
the Universe, assumed it to be operative in a way
which we now perceive to be as little in harmony
with the truth of things as the grosser
materialistic belief. The notion that the Divine
Being does no more than pronounce a word, in
order that natural phenomena shall be evoked,
fully armed, ex nihilo, is hardly less absurd,
hardly less derogatory to the nature of Divinity
than the opposite belief that matter existed from
the eternity of the past, and can, by its own
combinations, give rise to human consciousness.
Even our comprehension of the natural machinery
by means of which physical effects are produced
may serve, for instance, to put a new complexion
on the meaning of the familiar expression, "Let
there be light." That the sensation in human
consciousness of light is an expression of Divine
Will, is emphatically one of the ideas I am eager
to emphasize, but we know that the result is

produced by the complicated mechanism of etheric
vibration, and that Divinity had a more
complicated task to perform, in providing for the
sensation of light, than would have been evolved
in the simple utterance of a decree. The
behaviour of the ether, in conveying vibrations
from distant sources of light, to the planets
requiring illumination, is complicated to that
degree that our investigations, as yet, have but
vaguely hinted at some of its complexities; but
the illustration serves to suggest the way in
which the results aimed at in creation are
obtained by what, relatively to early theological
belief, must be regarded as elaborate and
laborious methods; methods almost certainly,
associated with a stupendous hierarchy of
subordinate agencies reflecting the Divine Will
at every stage of the process.
But so far I have been dealing only with half the
idea I want to convey; that which is, in a
certain sense, the least important half, because
it involves ideas which, independently of occult
research, will probably be found floating in the
thought of the period, though perhaps, in most
cases, more vaguely than when clarified by a
broad and comprehensive appreciation of the
world's evolution, as a whole. The expansion of
the idea into the region of intangible cause and
effect, is certainly not yet familiar to ordinary
psychological speculation. But, to begin with,
all of us who have been appreciative of
Theosophical teaching on the comprehensive scale,
will be familiar with the idea that what is known
as the law of Karma, is a law operative on the
moral plane, as definitely as the law of
gravitation controls the region of physical
manifestation. But that law is generally thought
of as a vague expression of Divine Will; and even
with such opportunity as may be furnished by
familiarity, in some cases, with the evolution of
specific Egos through a long series of lives,
though it is exceeding difficult to recognize it

as working with the regularity so plainly
observable when we are dealing with the laws of
physical Nature, nevertheless, we do broadly
recognize the idea that conduct in life of a
specific order is productive of definite
consequences, following an inevitable rule, and
not subject in each case to specific judgements
resembling those of a human autocrat. None the
less, however, when we think of Karma, good or
bad, as operative to produce agreeable or painful
conditions in the life or lives following any
action in question, it is difficult to get out of
the habit of thinking that the Ego concerned has
somehow been the subject of a judgement. The
physical laws of Nature seem so fundamentally
welded with matter that it is only with a mental
effort we can comprehend them as in truth the
expression of a conscious will emanating from, or
reflected from, conscious will on some level of
Divine existence. On the other hand, the moral
aspects of conduct, the rightness or wrongness of
specific action, suggest instinctively the idea
that their conformity, or non-conformity, with
the intentions of God, is the explanation of
their rightness or their wrongness. In this case
a mental effort is required to establish the
conception that the Divine will is so
marvellously penetrating and precise in its
operation that it cannot any longer be thought of
as due, so to speak, to capricious spasms of
admiration or disapproval, but is as uniform in
its operation as the law of gravitation - as
complex in its character as the laws of chemical
affinity. It is Law, enacted once for all and
applicable to all conceivable varieties of
circumstances.
The conception with which we are thus inevitably
faced by a profound study of the whole subject,
is that the whole scheme of morals, in the
broadest acceptation of that term, is governed by
a body of law as comprehensive as the law of
gravitation, as detailed as those which are

studied in chemical laboratories, where the will
of God, in reference to matter, is investigated
by experiment and even guided, by the free will
of man, towards purposes we may desire to
subserve. And just as the physical law is
operative, not merely with great masses of
matter, but with microscopic morsels, or even
with ultra-microscopic particles, so the moral
law can penetrate the smallest crevices of our
moral nature, dealing as appropriately with the
pettiest short-comings, with the feeblest
aspirations upward, as with the grandest
achievements of philanthropy or the foulest
varieties of crime.
It must be allowed that we cannot easily escape
from old habits of thought, nor give up the trick
of thinking of any particular faculty we may
possess as a gift of Nature, of any suffering we
may be called upon to endure as a chastisement
inflicted by a Divine Master for our good. We
retain, in many cases, even the habit of
regarding "our daily bread" as something which is
given to us "this day," and for which it is
decent, on our part, to return thanks, as we sit
down to table. Such habits of thought are pretty
and harmless in their place, for people who do
not care to penetrate, with open eyes, into the
mysteries of life, who are content with the
simplicities of a reverent attitude and
unconsciously content to wait till a later
opportunity for realizing that nothing can excite
a more profoundly reverential attitude of mind
than a clear vision, reaching in, or up, to the
actual truth of things. But the Occult student
need not be the slave of any tradition, however
useful it may have been in its time, and if the
idea I am endeavouring to suggest is rightly
apprehended, it can never present itself to any
mind as at war with the reverential spirit. On
the contrary, it is calculated to enhance our
reverence for the Divine Power above, when we
realize that the wisdom that guides its exercise

is sufficiently profound, extensive, and
penetrating to formulate laws which deal with all
the varieties of moral condition to which the
free will of mankind, an essential factor in
spiritual evolution, can possibly give rise.
Nor when the almost infinite resources of free
will within the domain of law are recognized,
will the recognition of an all-pervading system
of moral law be, in any way, confusion to the
mind. At the present stage of average human
development, that element of free will within
human nature is hardly illuminated with
sufficient knowledge to render it capable, so to
speak, of steering a chosen path through the
complexities of the law. But the law, itself,
provides compensation for the embarrassments of
ignorance while ignorance prevails, at the same
time that it provides opportunity for the
exercise of free will, when a later stage more
enlightened knowledge shall guide its exercise.
Nor even need we cast aside the early
anthropomorphic conception of Divinity which
appealed to the saintship of a more primitive
age, and responded to the spiritual thirst of
humanity for a Divine object of worship,
sufficiently like ourselves to excite adoration
and love. We who are, at present, concerned with
the attempt to comprehend the meaning of the
Higher Occultism, may be embarrassed, for a time,
by finding it impossible to retain
anthropomorphic conceptions of Divinity while, as
yet, our knowledge is insufficient to picture in
imagination the Divinity which, in some
mysterious fashion, is at once, as it were, the
fountain of the love principle and the
destination of that principle as it works in our
own nature. To suppose that the Higher Occultism,
because it puts aside some of the crude fancies
of humanity's childhood, embodies a hard, cold,
or unsympathetic conception of Divine rule, is to
misunderstand its whole significance more
deplorably almost than this unfortunate result

can be accomplished by any other
misunderstanding. The essence of many religious
conceptions may still be retained in our thought,
even when their ecclesiastical presentation is
put from us as out of date, and the complete
grasp of the ideas I have been endeavouring, in
the course of this essay, to suggest - thoughts
so subtle that their clear presentation is a
matter of extreme difficulty - will, for example,
help to emphasize, rather than to discredit, one
of the most beautiful phrases that can be
borrowed from the literature of early religion.
For our free will, with the help of improved
enlightenment, may enable us, in conformity with
the reign of law on the moral plane, to vindicate
the profound truth that free will, itself, is an
element of Divinity within our own nature, a
power which may render us, each in our turn,
capable, in a certain sense, of rising above all
law, constrained though we may be, by relative
insignificance, to obey it for a time. I do not
mean that any free will of man can countervail
any detail of the moral law pervading the system
to which we belong; but just as a clear
comprehension of physical law enables us to work
out results on the physical plane, of which we
may be definitely regarded as the authors, so the
ultimate comprehension of the loftier law will
enable us, if that figure of speech be
permissable, to ascend to regions of existence in
which we shall transcend its operation,
vindicating that old familiar phrase, in my mind
a moment ago, that in Divinity itself - not
merely in the sphere of manifestation on which
our potentialities may be developed - "we live
and move and have our being."

THE HIGHER OCCULTISM
THE instruction given in ancient Greece to those
who took part in the meetings at Eleusis celebrated in history as the Eleusinian Mysteries
- related, as we have abundant reason to believe,
to super-physical knowledge concerning the higher
planes of Nature, of the kind that has been
freely promulgated amongst us in recent years.
Such knowledge is that with which we are engaged
in our study of the Higher Occultism. The eager
pursuit of super-physical knowledge has been a
leading characteristic of civilized intelligence
for the last fifty years, within which time
multitudes have come to know that communication
between this plane of life and that to which
humanity passes after the death of the body is
possible. But the great movement - having a wider
scope than that which, importance as its
influence has been, is narrowed to the
consideration of experiences immediately
following the physical life - the study of the
Higher Occultism with which we are now concerned,
originated with the Theosophical Society, the
branches of which spread now over the whole
world. This Society was, at all events as regards
this country, the channel through which recent
enlightenment has been poured, and this it
becomes necessary to glance back over the history
of the current movement in order to appreciate
the importance of the work it has been priviliged
to accomplish, as also in order to appreciate the
dignity of the task which lies before it. And to
do this effectually it is necessary to look back
even farther than to those earlier beginnings of
modern civilization when the knowledge that we
have been enabled to handle so freely was already
in the possession of a few, but guarded for these
few, in accordance with what was then held to be
imperative necessity, by secrecy of the most
rigid order.
At a period long anterior to the establishment of

the Eleusinian Mysteries, similar teaching was
undoubtedly conveyed to students of Occultism
attached to Egyptian temples, and what we know
now enables us to realize that there never has
been a time in the history of mankind during
which the evolving race was left entirely without
guidance from those by whom the great laws
governing the whole evolution were correctly
understood. In the childhood of the race, indeed,
as we are now in a position to apprehend so
clearly, such knowledge was only possessed by
representatives of a more advanced evolution,
trusted, under Divine Providence, with the
regulation of the whole undertaking - with the
nurture and education of the new race of which
they were in charge. But gradually, as the more
advanced representatives of this race attained
something resembling maturity of intelligence, a
few amongst them, qualified by exceptionally
rapid advancement, were priviliged to share in
the wisdom of their preceptors. In this way,
without having any detailed knowledge of the
manner in which the progress was accomplished, we
can appreciate, without the least shadow of
uncertainty, the way in which the initiated
adepts of our own human family first became
organized as a distinct association, qualified by
degrees to assume the responsibilities originally
belonging to the representatives of the superior
race whose contact with humanity is dimly
suggested in history by vague traditions of
Divine Kings. But for many milleniums the Adepts
of our humanity held it to be premature to share
their wisdom with the indiscrminate multitude.
The Occult student is enabled to appreciate the
considerations which induced them to maintain
this reserve. All knowledge in varying degrees,
according to its importance, is associated with
varying degrees of moral responsibility. Putting
the idea in language with which most of us are
now familiar, the Karma of action, distinctly at
variance with the loftier purposes of spiritual
evolution, becomes terribly emphasized when such

action is realized by the agent as in conflict
with the Divine purpose. This idea is susceptible
of elaborate expansion, but in its simplest form
is the vindication of that policy of secrecy as
applied to super-physical knowledge which some of
us familiar with the publicity rightly attached
to the progress of discovery in physical science,
are sometimes disposed to resent. Dealing,
however, for the moment merely with the course of
events, we have to recognize that all information
accessible to human research connected with those
higher planes of Nature, concerning which we are
now able to speak so freely, was as a matter of
fact guarded from public dissemination by the
vows which, until very recently, precluded an
initiate from disclosing the secrets of
initiation.
But we are now enabled to realize that knowledge
formerly included amongst the secrets of
initiation is knowledge of a kind which, sooner
or later, every human being must possess as a
condition providing for his progress along the
path of evolution marked out for him by the great
design. To appreciate the true importance of that
Higher Occultism with the study of which we are
now concerned, it is necessary that the full
significance of the idea I have just endeavoured
to express should be grasped by everyone who
takes part in such work as that we have now in
hand. Earlier impressions with reference to the
teaching conferred on students of Occultism in
former ages, are generally to the effect that
such teaching must have been intensely
interesting, that it invested the possessor with
powers of a kind unfamiliar to ordinary life,
that it was something so desirable in itself that
no personal sacrifices were allowed to stand in
the way of those who aspired to it, that no
perils daunted them, that no temptations of a
wordly nature could turn them aside from its
pursuit. All such conceptions were perfectly
sound as far as they went, but they failed

entirely to interpret the great primary motive
that inspired those who pursued occult knowledge
with a correct appreciation of all that its
acquisition signified. It is true that the Adept
and, in a lesser degree, those who are advancing
along the path leading to adeptship, acquire
knowledge of transcendent interest, and powers
the dignity of which cannot easily be
exaggerated. But these rewards are not those
which the enlightened aspirant for adeptship is
seeking in his long and laborious efforts to make
progress in that direction. That which he soon
learns to realize, if morally capable of
continuous advance along the path he has chosen,
is suggested by the simple truth that the path
leading to adeptship is the condensed epitome of
the whole design which Divine Wisdom has sketched
out on an enormous scale for the ultimate
progress of all humanity. The supreme
achievements of adeptship establish those who
attain it on the moral, intellectual, and
spiritual level which represents the culmination
of all that is possible for the human race as
such. Occult Science is so concatenated
altogether in its vast entirety, that these great
truths can only be fully grasped by those who
have completely assimilated the teaching now
available for all of us who care to profit by it,
concerning the whole design in which the human
race is involved. But all who have profited
effectually by the literature of modern Occultism
will be in a position to appreciate the force of
what I have just said, and even those who as yet
are merely approaching the great study, under the
influence of that sympathetic feeling for it now
so widely diffused, will no doubt be able to
catch the significance of the fundamenal truth I
have endeavoured to express, and will thus be
ready to perceive the manner in which the study
of the conditions leading upwards towards
adeptship casts a flood of light upon the future
progress of the human race; while conversely, the
study of the teaching we have been privileged to

receive concerning the future destinies of the
race, will invest progress towards adeptship with
a dignity far greater than that assigned to it at
an earlier period of thought, by observers who
merely supposed that it was aimed at for the sake
of its knowledge and its power.
Reverting now to the course of events, we have to
begin by contemplating the attitude of the
advanced occultist towards the world at large, at
a period anterior to the recent outburst of
specific teaching. Of course it was obvious to
those already on adept levels, at any period of
the past to which we may look back, that sooner
or later the knowledge they so jealously guarded
would have to be disseminated broadcast
throughout the world. But their knowledge also
enabled them to perceive that the whole
stupendous scheme of human evolution was
susceptible of division into two great halves. It
has been the task of modern interpreters of
Occultism to describe the characteristics of
these two great phases of evolution in
considerable detail, and we know that throughout
the first half of the process - frequently
described as the downward arc of evolution - the
Divine purpose was gradually fulfilled by the
differentiation of the diffused spiritual energy
animating the undertaking, into specific centers
of consciousness, these constituting, when
developed, human Egos, qualified to accumulate
experience through a long course of successive
incarnations, and gradually to arrive, in that
way, at the midway station of the whole great
journey, with no other duty, so to speak, up to
that time, than those relating to their own
individualization, to their acquisition of
strength and capacity as separated entities each
conscious of its own interests. Looking back
indeed to earlier races of mankind anterior even
to the mighty Atlantean race immediately
preceding our own, we may realize, almost with
surprise, from our present point of view, that

the most sublime virtue we now are qualified to
admire - and some of us perhaps, in some degree,
qualified to aspire to - the virtue of
unselfishness, did not even dawn as a conception
on the human mind in the beginning.
On the contrary, there was a stage, during the
progress of humanity along the downward arc, when
selfishness was the law of progress - of such
progress as was then desired in accordance with
the Divine purpose. But from the midway stage of
human evolution onwards, new conceptions of right
and wrong became possible. Of course the midway
stage was not reached by the whole human race
simultaneously, but a considerable number of
millions may have been standing fairly in the
front, by the time the Atlantean race had lived
through half the period of the life assigned to
it. And from that period onward, it became
theoretically possible for those members of the
human family who had most completely fulfilled
the programme of Nature up to that time to
appreciate the loftier purposes of the further
evolution awaiting them during the second half of
the great evolutionary process - during the
upward arc leading towards Divine perfection.
We do not know with precision how soon it became
theoretically possible for the most advanced
members of our own family to receive, from the
superior teachers who preceded them, the
knowledge which we now handle so freely and
describe as the Higher Occultism; but at all
events, during the latter half of the Atlantean
race some members of our own human family were
enabled to appreciate the lofty design sketched
out for their advancement, to detach themselves
from the chaotic throng of their self-seeking
contemporaries, and to establish here and there,
even in that early world, centres of initiation
from which their influence began in a faint,
diluted fashion to radiate through the world, and
towards which those whose spontaneous interior

progress had invested them with appropriate
qualifications were drawn into the paths of
higher knowledge. But millenniums had to
accumulate until thousands were no longer
adequate to record the progress of the years,
before the adept fraternity could contemplate the
possibility of disseminating the wisdom they
possessed broadcast through the world. Some
elevated moral principles, as the progress of
mankind along the upward arc proceeded, were of a
kind which it was possible to convey with safety
to the multitude, and that possibility found its
expression in the fondation of all the great
religions of the world which have emanated, as we
see now without the possibility of mistake, from
the wisdom of early adeptship. That suggesion
need not be held at variance with the belief
which assigns a Divine origin to some religions
of the kind referred to. Divine purposes are
worked out in all cases through subordinate
agencies, and the comprehension of this, in many
ways, is one of the illuminating discoveries that
we are enabled to reach through the study of
Occultism. But at all events, those who
appreciate the spiritual and educational
blessings conferred on humanity by religion, may
readily erect on that primary belief the further
conception that at a certain stage of human
progress specific knowledge of spiritual science
may, without offending against the dignity of
religion, be super-added to it. And what we know
now is that for some centuries, adept observers
of human growth in this fifth race of ours - the
first beyond the Atlantean on the upward arc of
evolution - have been on the watch for
indications which may show that an adequate
number of those left hitherto to the simpler
influence and guidance of religious thought,
might become qualified for the reception in its
entirety, or at all events, in considerable
measure, of that spiritual science from which
religion, in the first instance, had its rise.

We can see now, looking back 100, 200, or even
300 years, that some experiments were made by the
adept experts of this science, to ascertain
whether amongst ordinary humanity people were
ripe for higher teaching in a sufficient degree
to justify its public dissemination. To trace the
details of these experiments would be a
considerable task by itself, which indeed some of
us have attempted to carry out by studying the
life histories of distinguished occultists
throughout the Middle Ages. But passing over
that, for the moment, we have to recognize that
until our own time such experiments were held to
be unsuccessful, and so we come at last - along
the train of thought I have been following - to
an intelligent comprehension of the circumstances
that prompted the recent outburst of teaching
from adept sources. That teaching embodied in the
earliest Theosophical books was itself
experimental in its inception, but unlike
previous attempts of a similar character, was
crowned with success. Sufficient numbers of
people in the modern world - or leaving out of
account whatever has been done in the East, I may
fairly say in this modern European world of ours
- have shown themselves entitled, by the
readiness of their appreciation, to receive
occult teaching in such abundant volume, that we
stand now in a position, in that respect, of
intellectual advancement, far exceeding the
corresponding position reached by those who, as a
privilige individually earned and guarded by vows
of secrecy, were taught something of the Higher
Occultism when the Mysteries were celebrated at
Eleusis.

THE OBJECTS OF THE THEOSOPHICAL
SOCIETY
1. - THEOSOPHICAL "BROTHERHOOD"

FROM time to time we may usefully review the
gradually improving conceptions we have been
enabled to form concerning the grand purposes
underlying the Theosophical Movement. The phrases
in which these were ultimately crystallized do
not (though this matters little) reflect the
ideas present to the minds of those who, in 1875,
did actually, in a certain sense, "found" the
Society. At that time it was the result of
interest excited among a small group of persons
frequenting Madame Blavatsky's rooms in New York,
by the exhibition of her wonderful Occult powers.
As Colonel Olcott explains in his Diary Leaves a
lecture was given in September, 1875, at Madame
Blavatsky's rooms by a certain Mr. Felt, of whom
we lose sight afterwards, on the Adept Magic of
Egyptian priests. Colonel Olcott then suggested
the formation of a Society to study this subject.
That was done, and though the title
"Theosophical" was adopted (doubtless under
occult guidance), Colonel Olcott at one time
proposed to call it a "Miracle Club."
The word "Brotherhood" does not creep into its
records till some years later. It was first used
by Mr.C.C.Massey and his friends in London when
they formed a British branch of the New York
Society. They described its purpose as being "to
discover the nature and powers of the human
soul," and they went on to declare that they
believed in "a great intelligent First Cause and
in the Divine sonship of the spirit of Man, and
hence in the immortality of that spirit and in
the universal Brotherhood of the human race."
Colonel Olcott took this hint and developed the
idea in a new statement of subjects as follows:
"(1) The study of Occult Science; (2) the

formation of a nucleus of universal brotherhood;
(3) the revival of Oriental literature." The word
"brotherhood" was afterwards shifted into the
first place, but it was always accompanied by the
qualifying term "Nucleus." It was not used, and
should never be used, by Theosophists with the
significance attached to it by those concerned
with mundane politics or social reconstruction on
the physical plane. The word in its theosophical
meaning refers to the Unity of Divine
consciousness on lofty planes of Nature, and to
the nucleus for the reflection of that Unity on
the physical plane that may be formed by
theosophical students who appreciate the teaching
aright.
The gross democratic meaning attached to the term
"brotherhood" is an insult to theosophical
teaching. The consciousness which expands into
perfected humanity is, no doubt, in a subtle
metaphysical sense identical in its nature with
the consciousness not merely of the humbler
classes in civilized countries, but with that
also of the crocodile, the dog, the Australian
savage, and the Master of Wisdom. But this does
not mean that all manifested consciousness in
whatever vehicle we find it is, therefore,
invested with equal claims on our respect. It is
invested with equal claims on our sympathy, and
that is how people who do not appreciate subtle
distinctions drift into the misuse of the term
"brotherhood." If the sheep and the guinea-pig
are included in the universal brotherhood, well
and good, but we do not ask the sheep and the
guinea-pig to contribute their opinions to
discussion of the suffrage question, for example.
And that thought is a clue to the fallacy
involved in regarding theosophical brotherhood as
leading to political socialism. Theosophical
teaching concerning human evolution shows us the
human family at present at very different stages
of development. It rescues us from the oldfashioned blunder - arising from the ignorant

delusion that each new child is a new creation to the effect that all have equal rights.
According to a phrase classical in political
writing, all are equally entitled to "life,
liberty, and the pursuit of happiness," but with
very varied claims on the privilege of shaping
laws providing for the fufilment of that
fundamental idea.
Thus, to let the formula in which the objects of
the Theosophical Society are generally expressed
distort the purpose of the movement to suit the
purpose of any mundane theory of social reform is
a very grevious blunder. From the beginning all
qualified exponents of the Theosophical Movement
have warned us to keep clear of all political
contamination. The Society may include persons of
very varied political opinions, but within the
Society their only duty is to study and promote
the study of the super-physical spiritual science
gradually unfolded for our benefit and through us
for the benefit of all mankind. The fulfilment of
that duty should be compatible with perfect
harmony of feeling within the Society, where it
is needless and undesirable to discuss varied
beliefs as to how the physical welfare of the
community may be best promoted. We should not
furnish unsympathetic critics of our real work
with an excuse for pretending to regard us as a
body of people entangled with questionable
schemes for subversive changes on the physical
plane.
2. - THE STUDY OF COMPARATIVE RELIGIONS
By those who concern themselves with it, this
second "object" is liable to be misunderstood. By
a larger number it is disregarded. It has a very
definite purpose really. Briefly stated, that is,
to bring out by such study the fact that at the
basis of all religions worth talking of there are
certain fundamental ideas, more or less vaguely

hinted at, which are clearly set forth in
Theosophical teaching. Theosophical writers have
sometimes too emphatically emphasized the idea
that Theosophy is not a religion. Of course it is
not, in the sense that it has no hard and fast
creed of the kind that most religions adopt. But
no one who really understands Theosophical
teaching is in need of any other religion. A real
comprehension of the Divine Hierarchy, and of the
laws governing human evolution, covers the whole
area of thought and emotion which any religion at
its best can cover (besides covering a good deal
more). Not on that account will any true
Theosophist repudiate any religion with which by
race or nationality he may be traditionally
connected. Here we have a very pretty subtlety to
consider. If any Theosophist identified race,
residence, and habits of thought with this
country is asked the question, "Are you a
Christian?" what should he answer? To say "No"
(because in his inner consciousness he felt that
occult wisdom superseded all religions having a
definite name) would be misleading and in bad
taste. My answer in such a case would be,
"Certainly; of course I am." I might go on to
explain that I had no sympathy with the
caricature of Christianity provided for us by
most of the European Churches, but that would
only be possible if the conversation were
protracted.
The idea to enforce is, that any one who takes up
any particular religion and makes a close study
of that, embellishing its crudities as far as he
can by the results of his own thinking, is not
doing anything which resembles the fulfilment of
the second object of the Society. On the
contrary, he is pressing against it. The more he
succeeds in recommending to respect and attention
any particular religion in preference to others,
the more he is tending to defeat the second
object of the Society, the grand underlying
purpose of which - veiled rather than fully

expressed by the formal enumeration of objects is to convey to the large numbers of people now
fit to receive it, the magnificent volume of
knowledge concerning spiritual truth hitherto in
the exclusive possession of the Elder Brethen of
humanity.
This could not have been done at a much earlier
period. Clumsy religions, brutal bigotry, atheism
(the result of disgust developed among the most
intelligent by the stupidity of priests and
clergy), all stood in the way. But the experiment
was made in these latter years, and has been
justified by partial success. Multitudes all over
the world do appreciate the gift of occult
knowledge. Of course, besides these, many rush in
without understanding the real purpose of the
movement, caught by some phrase associated with
it, into which they read their own
prepossessions. They may impede the progress of
the great work for a time, but there are forces
behind this that must prevail in the end. Far
beyond the limits of the Society the fascination
of occult teaching is spreading through the
cultured classes. To that growth we must look
forward with confident hope, even if we, or some
of us, get a little out of patience with mistaken
ideas permeating the Society at this early stage
of its existence. The Theosophical Movement is
much bigger than the Theosophical Society, which
must undergo great purification if it is, in
future years, destined to lead the Theosophical
Movement. The movement itself is pressing towards
a period when advanced thinkers will not be
comparing medieval religions, but will be
comparing whichever of these appeals best to
their sympathies, with the grand spiritual truths
conveyed to them by the theosophical revelation recasting their favourite religion, if they cling
to it at all, in harmony with these truths. At
the end there will be many who find in the
teaching which we still call "occult" all the
religion they need. Others will prefer to

decorate it with some of the phraseology of their
earlier faith. Thus ceremonial religions will
survive by their various names, and in the midst
of all there will be a central block of thinkers,
more or less indifferent to ceremonial, who will
be content to call themselves "Theosophists,"
pure and simple. But the same ideas will permeate
all groups, and great progress will then have
been made in the development of that
"brotherhood" the "nucleus" of which we, who
understand our task, are called upon to "form" at
this commencement of the stupendous religious
construction, the beautiful results of which
those adequately gifted with foresight can
discern beyond the horizon.
3. - THE POWERS LATENT IN MAN
The third object of the Society is less liable to
be misunderstood than either the first or second,
but is perhaps the most important, and, like any
other idea expressed in concise language, is open
to various interpretations. It is formally stated
in these terms: "To investigate the unexplained
laws of Nature and the powers latent in Man."
These words properly understood may be held to
inaugurate the study of an entirely new science.
The mistake sometimes made is to suppose that
they merely prescribe an attempt to cultivate
hitherto undeveloped faculties theoretically
latent in each of us. That, in most cases, would
prove an extremely unsatisfying or disappointing
pursuit. Most people of this age and race have
come into the present life without the
potentiality of such development in themselves.
As with every other attribute we possess the
potentiality of psychic perception can only exist
as the product of some effort made in a former
life. Many theosophists accept en bloc the theory
of Karma, and at once proceed to ignore it when
they think of themselves. They are too often
encouraged to do this by people endowed with

psychic faculties who find these so natural and
easily used that they cannot help thinking that
anyone might acquire them by working for that end
with sufficient earnestness of purpose. Volumes
(reckoning such writing in the aggregate) have
ben written to assure candidates for psychic
development that if they will only "lead the
life" - be ascetics in the matter of food, drink,
etc., etc. - they will be able to verify
Theosophical teaching for themselves. One might
just as well tell a weak, undersized boy that by
eating underdone beefsteaks and using the
dumbbells he would make himself able to go into
the ring and beat a prize-fighter. The boy's
Karma has not endowed him with an athletic body,
and he must be content to use it for pursuits it
is adapted to deal with.
Of course it is true that there are cases in
which partially endowed persons may greatly
stimulate their latent faculties. It is only a
question of their Karmic condition. There are all
degrees of this condition to consider. At one end
of the scale we have people who are naturally
psychic from childhood onwards, and who, if they
take pains, develop into great clairvoyants and
seers in mature life. At the other end of the
scale we have those who, however gifted
intellectually, morally, and physically, have no
glimmering of psychic faculty and could not
develop that even if they made the struggle to do
so the passion of a lifetime and ruined their
health by asceticism. Between these two extremes
there are all varieties of condition, and in some
of these appropriate effort may give rise to
results. I will only add, as a personal
conviction, that in no cases will the results
ensue from fanatical rules about eating and
drinking. The finest clairvoyants and psychics I
have known - and I have been priviliged to know a
good many - are people who laugh at all such
rules and eat whatever they find by experience
keeps them in the best health. I am assured on

high authority that that is the only sound rule
to work with. Our bodies are the instruments we
have to make use of in this life, and whatever
work we have to do, we can do it best by keeping
the instrument in good order. It should go
without saying that no one worth talking about
makes pleasure the test of what is best for him
to eat or drink.
But if it is useless for most people even to
think of cultivating "latent" faculties in
themselves, how does the third object affect
them? In an extremely important way! The world at
large knows nothing of the conditions that have
been reached by some members of the human family
- that may be reached eventually by all in some
future life - and the work which Theosophists are
priviliged to carry on is the dissemination of
the knowledge on this subject which they, if they
avail themselves of the opportunities for study
which the Theosophical Movement has provided, are
in a positon to promote. The laws governing the
gradual development of latent faculties in the
human family to which we belong constitute a
mighty science. I have said that we cannot all
make ourselves clairvoyant, but we can all, if we
take advantage of our opportunities, become
proficient theoretically in that science; able to
help on multitudes of others so far less
priviliged than ourselves. And that is certainly
one way - I lean to think it is the only way - in
which people who in the current life are
beginning to be anxious about their latent
faculties can really provide for their growth.
Amplifying the above generalities, the first
thing the true Theosophist has got to do is to
understand the goal to be aimed at - in other
words, the place in Nature, the condition and
powers and functions of those whom we speak of
now as "Masters of the White Lodge." I do not
much like the phrase, but it will serve for the
moment. In the early days of the movement we were

all led to say to people thinking of joining the
Society: "It does not matter whether you believe
in the Adept Brotherhood or not." And it did not
matter then. We felt that membership in the
Society would surely lead them sooner or later to
acquire this essential belief. If it does not,
they might really employ their energies elsewhere
to better advantage. Do my readers realize, I
wonder, how it came to pass that "Esoteric
Buddhism" sent a thrill through the world on its
first appearance? That was not merely or chiefly
because the sketch it gave of occult science met
an intellectual need, but because it made people
think of the Great Adepts, and that gave them a
chance of driving home a return current of
thought. They cannot begin such intercourse. The
first appeal must come from the aspiring human
Ego. But once that aspiration is kindled, any
results may ensue.
Now, of course, those who profit by later
theosophical literature may learn much more about
the Masters than they could gather from the first
book. That, like every other theosophical book I
have ever looked at, is replete with
imperfection, for we who endeavour to interpret
the rudiments of occult science are working on
the threshold of infinity.
But there is much known now that was quite
unknown to the early leaders of the movement,
about the White Lodge and the methods of approach
to it, and those are the subjects and ideas
people should concern themselves with if they
desire, in an intelligent way, to carry out our
third object - to "investigate" the laws of
Nature governing the development of the faculties
and powers latent in Man.

THE BORDERLAND OF SCIENCE
ASTRONOMY, OVERT AND OCCULT
1. - NEBULÆ

AN intelligent survey of our present knowledge
and theories concerning nebulæ seems to have been
given lately to an American astronomical society
by a Mr. Vincent Francis, and I find it reprinted
in Popular Astronomy. The paper is illustrated by
a fine photograph of the spiral nebula in Coma
Berenices, which happens to show very clearly a
condition of nebular growth that I have insisted
upon before now, and which is entirely supported
by the writer I am quoting. You can see in the
photograph how the central sun is condensing
first before the spirals break up into planets.
The contrary view was the defect of the grand
original Laplace discovery. Laplace conceived the
nebula to condense gradually from the outside;
rings being formed, the outermost first, the
central sun being left to the last. By degrees it
was perceived that this would be a very unnature-like process. It was putting the cart
before the horse, or the child before the parent.
Mr. Francis more properly talks of "the parent
sun" in discussing nebular growth.
This whole department of astronomy has only been
evolved since the development of the telescope.
One may almost say, since the Huggins discovery
that some nebulæ give a purely gaseous spectrum,
making it certain that they were not star
clusters. Since then we have got on rapidly. It
was found, indeed, that some nebulæ, certainly
not resolvable into clusters, gave continuous
spectra. Some consisted of glowing gas and some
of solid particles. Then it became apparent that
most probably all nebulæ were spiral in their
shape, and we approached the conception that

central suns were formed before the planets. Then
(again with the help of Sir William Huggins) we
got at a means of ascertaining the motion of
nebulæ in the line of sight. It is an old story
now, but fascinating as ever. The dark lines in
the spectra of stars are sometimes displaced a
little as compared with those of similar bodies
in the laboratory. If they are displaced towards
the red end of the spectrum, that means that the
star is receding from us. If they are displaced
towards the violet end, that means that the star
is approaching us. The light waves are, in fact,
in the one case crushed together, in the other
drawn out. Recent work with this method at the
Lowell observatory has shown that the great
Andromeda nebula is approaching us at the rate of
300 kilometres per second, and other nebulæ show
still higher velocities. But they are so far off,
hopelessly beyond the reach of parallax, almost
too far for guesswork, that some astronomers
incline to think them outside our Universe
altogether, an unacceptable guess in my humble
judgement. The great nebula in Orion is, of
course, the biggest. It covers a region of space
not less than one which light would only cross in
forty years. But we cannot suggest a maximum
limit of its magnitude, because we have no notion
how far off it is. When we call it the nebula in
Orion, we merely mean that we can see it if we
look in the direction of Orion. How far it may be
behind the stars of that group is wholly
uncertain.
How do we see it? Is it self-luminous? There is
reason to assume that the matter of which it
consists is rarer than the rarest vacuum we can
create here by instrumental means. How can such
attenuated matter emit light? That is one of the
puzzles we have still to deal with in connection
with this subject. But meanwhile it seems pretty
clear that there are some nebulæ that do not
shine, dark nebulæ that play some mysterious part
in the vast economy of Nature. The nebulous

matter that almost surrounds the Pleiades is
assumed to be dark in the sense of not being
self-luminous, because its spectrum is identical
with that of the stars to which it belongs,
indicating that it shines with reflected light.
Then the behaviour of Nova Persei, the star which
suddenly blazed out in the constellation Perseus
in 1901, suggested the existence in that
connection of a vast dark nebula. It lighted up a
region of the sky, the magnitude of which forbade
the idea that there had been any transmission of
matter across that space. The phenomenon could
only be due to the velocity of light.
The paper before me makes favourable mention of
the "planetesmal" theory, that has been much
discussed of late in scientific reviews,
bracketing it with the theory that nebulæ that
show planetesmal knots or nuclei have originated
from the collision of worn-out suns. Possibly!
There is reason to suppose that such collisions
are among Nature's methods in starting a new
nebulae, but it is just as easy to assign
planetesmal knots to the aggregation of matter
within the spirals of a nebula after it has been
started in business by some other device - the
condensation of etheric matter from infinite
space, for example.
One more word while on this subject concerning a
theory that some astronmers have favoured to the
effect that nebulæ, in some cases at all events,
may be so remote that they constitute Universes
outside our own altogether. "Our" Universe, on
that hypothesis, is the whole stellar system
embraced by the Milky Way, and shaped, in the
aggregate, like a millstone, the diameter greatly
exceeding its thickness. Nebulæ are more frequent
in the direction of the thickness than in that of
the diameter, and from that condition of things
the hypothesis referred to has arisen. It has
always seemed to me to rest on quite insufficient
data, and I am glad to see that an American

astronomer, Professor Barnard, dismisses it with
confidence in its mistaken character. "We used to
think," he says, "of these nebulæ as being at
such vast distances from us, much beyond the
limits of our universe of stars. Photography has
shown in many ways that though their distances
must be great indeed they are often well this
side of more distant stars, and that many of
them, perhaps most of them, are within our
stellar system, and are no farther away than some
of the brighter stars."
In connection with the services photography has
rendered to astronomical science, Professor
Barnard mentions one that is new to me, though
doubtless familiar to experts in that line.
Comets, but faintly perceptible by the telescope
and showing no tails to the observer, are seen to
have tails by the photographic plate. And such
tails will sometimes be seen to drift away from
the comet altogether, the plate following them
for some days till they dissipate in space. That
fits in beautifully with the theory that comets'
tails consist of minute particles driven off by
light pressure from the Sun, though we have to
take into account evidence afforded by the plate
that changes take place in the structure of
comets' tails apparently due to forces emanating
from the comet itself.
2. - WITHIN OR BEYOND OUR UNIVERSE?
The American magazine Popular Astronomy is a very
serious publication, claiming respectful
attention, so I have been much interested in a
statement I find in the last number, concerning
the well-known and beautiful globular cluster in
Hercules. This is one of the most wonderful
objects in the heavens when seen through a fine
telescope. It consists of thousands of suns
aggregated together in dense mass, so that the
light of all those situated towards the middle is

blended in one mighty glow, only those towards
the periphery of the stupendous assemblage being
discernible as separate points of light. Now it
appears that one astronomer, Mr. Harlow Shapley,
of the Mount Wilson Solar Observatory, has
arrived at the conclusion - by what process of
reasoning we are not told - that the cluster is
distant from us to an extent that would make its
parallax (if it had one) 0".0001. Its distance
from us, therefore, would be 100,000 light years,
and its diameter 1,000 light years. According to
this calculation, says Popular Astronomy, "the
cluster is thus another sidereal universe
external to our own." Of course some astronomers
have always been inclined to think that some of
the nebulæ are in this way other universes - a
view I have always been disinclined to adopt. Mr.
Pickering, I see, who contributes to the magazine
just quoted an article on "the sixty finest
objects in the sky," merely mentions the cluster
in Hercules as a very fine object, and does not
discuss Mr. Shapley's calculation. But he treats
the fact that most of the clusters lie within 5
to 30 degrees of the Galactic equator as adverse
to the theory that they are objects lying beyond
the Galaxy, "although such may nevertheless be
the case."
Now the line of thought that seems to me more
definitely adverse to the theory has to do with
infinitudes of various unthinkable orders, taken
in conjunction with ideas suggested by the
visible facts of our own Universe. By that last
phrase I mean all the millions of visible stars
embraced by the Milky Way. The actual diameter of
the space included by that wonderful girdle is a
matter of conjecture, but roughly the Milky Way
is often spoken of as probably about 50,000 light
years away from us in either direction, assuming
that we are somewhere near the centre of the
whole system, there or thereabouts. Now planetary
distribution within the Solar System shows us
outer planets set at ever increasing distances

from the central Sun. We have not yet worked out
any map showing the distribution of Solar Systems
in the Universe, but the old Hermetic
philosophers had a favourite saying, "As below,
so above." It is applicable to many observed
facts of Nature, and if we start with the
assumption that in the infinites of space there
may or must be other universes, the probability
would be that they are dispersed in space on
principles resembling the dispersal of planets
within the Solar System. The nearest planet to
the Sun is many times as distant as the Sun's
diameter. The nearest external universe to us
ought on the same principle to be many times the
distance of our Universe's diameter, and that, as
I have said above, is guessed at about 100,000
light years, so the nearest external universe
ought to be much more than that distance away. It
sounds ridiculous to talk of 100,000 light years
as an incredible measurement by reason of being
too little, but in talking about universes we
must think in terms of infinitude.
All this, I grant, is in the region of the most
unpractical thinking in which we can indulge, but
that is one of the fascinating attributes of
astronomy - it takes us outside the area of lowdown practicalities.
3. - PLANETS, STARS AND ATOMS
Like other sciences astronomy was paralyzed by
the war, and very little new work was
accomplished during its progress. But some
observations were directed to the question
whether the satellites of Jupiter revolve on
their axes or keep only one face to their august
primary. To be more rigidly accurate: do they
rotate on their axes only once in the period of a
revolution round the primary, or more often? The
question is full of interest, because it is
always cropping up in reference to the interior

planets, Venus and Mercury, and has a very
important bearing on all speculation as to life
in other worlds. The one celestial body that
undoubtedly turns only one face to its primary is
our own moon; but by common consent the moon is
to be regarded as a dead planet, whether we
accept (what seems to be) the foolish theory that
it is a fragment of the earth torn off at an
early stage of our planetary life, or the other
theory that it is really the remains of an older
world than ours, the outer casings of which were
melted off when the nebular condensation that
gave rise to our world was in progress. Now we
cannot frame any corresponding hypothesis that
would account for the satellites of Jupiter. Let
me remind the reader of what we know about them.
Leaving out of account the later discovered
exterior satellites outside the familiar four and these may be merely masses of meteoric matter
caught by the attraction of Jupiter - the wellknown four are bodies of considerable magnitude.
The two innermost, Io and Europa, to give them
the names that have been assigned to them, are
somewhat smaller than our moon, the two outer
ones, Ganymede and Callisto, are somewhat larger.
These have been the subject of study by Mr.
Waterfield of the British Astronomical
Association, and he thinks he has discerned
markings which show that Callisto always turns
the same face to Jupiter, while Ganymede, the
outermost of the four, does not seem quite to do
this, but has a period of rotation fifty-nine
minutes less than the period of its revolution
round the primary. It seems presumptuous to
criticize the conclusions of an astronomer using
powerful instruments, but this theory about tidal
action - the assumed cause of the single rotation
idea - is so much in fashion just now that one
can well believe observers falling in with it,
prone to discover evidence in its favour. My main
objection to it turns on very broad principles
which seem to underlie all reasonable theories of

the Universe. So far as observation enables us to
check the conception, the purpose of
manifestation on the physical plane is to provide
for the activities of life. All intelligent
thinkers have long since got beyond the primitive
notion that the Earth is the only inhabited
world; that the Sun and stars exist merely for
our sake. We need not jump to the conception that
all other worlds are inhabited by beings just
like ourselves, but the more closely we study the
Earth the more we find it teeming with life of
one kind or another in every corner, life in
forms adapted to the most varied conditions of
heat and cold. Directly faith lifts us above
blank materialism it becomes impossible to rest
content with the idea that any of the other
planets of the Solar System are mere purposeless
masses of dead matter. They must be theatres of
life of one kind or another.
Now the theory about turning one face to the
primary has even been applied to the interior
planets of our system. Venus and Mercury are
supposed by some astronomers to turn only one
face to the Sun. But this arrangement would make
them to be unfit to be the theatres of life of
any kind. One part would be burnt to a cinder,
and the other frozen to an unimaginable degree.
The theory as applied to Venus and Mercury is an
insult to the harmonies of Nature, and if
observers think they have detected markings the
motions of which seem to imply the single
rotation arrangement - I do not say tant pis pour
les faits, but tant pis pour the current
interpretation of the facts. As regards the
satellites of Jupiter it is true, even though
they should really turn one face to the primary,
they would in their revolution round him turn all
faces in succession to the Sun, so such light and
warmth as they get from him would be evenly
diffused. On the other hand, as against Mr.
Waterfield's contention, we have to take first
the all but universality of the habit celestial

bodies have of turning on their axes. Secondly,
the Jupiter satellites, whatever their origin may
have been, are certainly not what our satellite
is, remains of a world older than the primary.
They are four independent bodies of considerable
magnitude, and we must await the development of
our knowledge to a far higher level than we have
yet reached before expecting to comprehend their
beginnings. "We are ancients of the Earth," etc.,
and the expansion of our faculties since the days
of King Alfred have bridged the spaces of this
world in a way that would have indeed seemed
unthinkable for the earlier ancients of that
time. Another advance of corresponding importance
may enable us, or our successors, to cross in
consciousness the spaces of the Solar System.
In another direction of astronomical research
some American attention has been turned to Star
Clusters, with results rather too speculative to
command unqualified trust. Working with
calculations based upon apparent magnitudes and
probable (!) real luminosities, one observer of
the great cluster in Hercules assigns to it a
parallax that would give the distance across the
cluster as 1,000 light years. The calculation is
used to fortify the conjecture that such clusters
are distant universes lying in space apart from
our Universe, bounded by the Milky Way. Except as
giving us enormous magnitudes to think about,
speculation of this order hardly seems
interesting.

META-SCIENCE
We recognize "metaphysics" as a formless realm in
which the mind may wander and be free of the
tiresome regulations that impede thinking when we
are concerned with Science. But as the
intelligence of the world expands, may there come
into recognition, by degrees, a variety of
thinking that shall be called "meta-science,"

based on a gradual comprehension of natural law
extending beyond the realm of matter? An article
on "Fatalism and Destiny" in the Times Literary
Supplement, just published as I begin to write,
suggests this question. The author of the article
reaches no definite conclusions, and is mainly
concerned with putting aside, in an attitude of
lordly superiority, what he assumes to be a
tendency among soldiers engaged in the war to
adopt the theory of fatalism. Such theories "are
strange, because they seem like the intrusion of
a forgotten human nature in the rational body of
our beliefs." The soldier in the midst of
exploding shells is graciously pardoned for
taking refuge in fatalism, and the author
wanders, for three columns, around the subject,
somehow finding comfort in a distinction between
fatalism and "destiny," the value of which may
not be very clear to the reader.
Now it is quite true that the war has made the
whole subject, and many others that cling to it,
much more insistent in their demand on attention
than they used to be in the ancient days of
peace. And the wave of interest in super-physical
research and speculation that is spreading
through the intellectual world has a force that
seems likely here long to bear down the
affectation that the newspapers, as a rule, still
maintain - the pretence of assuming that all
attempts to penetrate the unseen mysteries of
Nature represent the foolishness of weak minds to
be laughed out of court by the same man in the
street. People who have lost dear relations in
the war are not easily warned of enquiries that
may throw light on their fate. And when they make
enquiry they find that belief in the possibility
of getting definite news from those who have
"passed on" is not confined, as they had been
told, to weak-minded women and fraudulent
fortune-tellers, but is held as a solid
conviction by a large number of the most eminent
men of the time. Then they are duly impressed.

Such books as Sir A. Conan Doyle's New
Revelation, Sir William Barrett's Threshold of
the Unseen, and Sir Oliver Lodge's Raymond, and
scores of earlier volumes of equal value and
dignified authorship, make the old-fashioned
attitude of supercilious contempt for
Spiritualism too ridiculous to be kept up much
longer even in Fleet Street. So we may be
approaching a time when metaphysics of the oldfashioned order - vague speculation about the
nature of Thought, and the intangible
philosophies of Hegel or Schopenhaur - will make
way for the development of a meta-science based
on as definite a foundation of fact and acquired
knowledge as the sciences concerned with the laws
governing Matter. As for the fatalism of the
gallant soldier taking his chances with the
shells, if that fortifies his natural pluck we
may well be content to let it alone, and perhaps
meta-science will show the, looker-on that even
if the hostile shell bears no definite address,
the long run makes it a matter of little ultimate
consequence whom it hits. Meta-science seems to
indicate (even in its present stage of
development) that "no life is found, which only
to one engine bound, falls off but cycles always
around." Tennyson did not stop, when he wrote the
Two Voices, to work out all the consequences of
this hypothesis, but amongst others it suggests
that even if no fatalism guarantees the justice
of each individual death on the battle-field,
compensation in the long run is mathematically
certain. And that view has the incidental
recommendation of making the Free-will of
humanity the ultimately dominant force in our
progress through the ages.
The most troublesome impediment in the way of
meta-science progress arises from the irritation
many otherwise intelligent people feel when asked
to pay attention to some alleged occurrence that
does not fit in with previous knowledge. When new
phenomena, like the penetrating power of Röntgen

rays or the susceptibility of electric waves in
the ether to be detected by suitable instruments,
can be reproduced at pleasure, the irritation
soon disappears, and the new discovery passes
into the region of common knowledge. But
sometimes a new discovery, though genuine, may
for a time be elusive. Consider for a moment the
phenomena of mesmerism, now passing into use in
medical practice, though very imperfectly
understood. The will of the mesmerist can be
proved as often as you like to have a definite
effect on the patient, but by reason of not
knowing how it operates, irritation prevents the
man in the street from believing the fact, though
he might just as well disbelieve in the aurora
borealis. But in truth few subjects on which we
can speculate are more attractive to the metascientist than the rationale of the human will.
People generally do not stop to consider that it
is really the original cause of almost everything
that is accomplished in physical life. No house
has ever been built, no machine has ever been
constructed, unless to begin with some human will
had started the activities required to
materialize the idea. But when it merely controls
the bricklayer (through the intermediation of
wages), and materializes itself by slow degrees,
people lose sight of the fact that Will has been
the origin of the result. Future science has got
to ascertain whether there may not be some more
direct way of bringing Will to bear on matter.

ATOMS AND ETHER
I have referred from time to time to the theory
that the electron is an atom of electricity
supported (in the beginning at all events) by Sir
J.J. Thomson and Sir Oliver Lodge. I have
ventured to repudiate that theory in favour of
its rival - the theory that the electron is an
atom of ether carrying a definite charge of
electricity. Of course, I am very far from being

alone in dissenting from the views of the
dignified authorities just mentioned, but the
atomic theory of electricity must be regarded so
far as the more orthodox view of the two, and a
recent number of Nature actually heads an article
with the words: "The Atom of Electricity." Now,
of course, one difficulty in the way of general
acceptance for the etheric theory of the electron
arises from the view that has been widely
entertained concerning the constitution of the
ether itself. According to that conception the
attributes of the ether embody a mass of paradox.
It has been described as non-molecular, denser
than the densest metals and yet utterly
intangible to our senses, perfectly frictionless,
interpenetrating all matter, which is at the same
time passing through it with planetary velocity.
Then this mysterious medium, at once denser than
the densest solid, and less so than the finest
gases, is undulating all the time at rates which
paralyze imagination, and giving rise to all the
sensations of light and colour.
But are we capable of framing any theory that
will fit the facts better than the ultra-dense
non-molecular theory? The great Russian chemist,
Mendeléeff, answered that question some years ago
in a book that attracted at the time less
attention than it deserved, while now, in the
midst of the electron controversy, it really
clamours for attention. It is called A Chemical
Conception of the Ether. I will endeavour to
explain the argument, content to say, first, that
there can be no one in the scientific hierarchy
great enough to treat any views of Mendeléeff's
with disdain. He was the originator of the
universally accepted periodic table of the
elements, an arrangement which groups them in
octaves in a way somewhat resembling the grouping
of musical sounds. The elements in each recurring
octave show attributes corresponding to those of
the previous octave. The discovery of this
relationship has given rise to many other

discoveries, for there were gaps in the periodic
table as first drawn up on the basis of such
knowledge as was then at our disposal. These gaps
pointed to the probability that there ought to be
elements that would fit them, and with that clue,
one by one most of these have been discovered.
Within recent years, however, the discovery of
the inert gases of the atmosphere - argon,
helium, krypton and the rest - presented chemists
with a new puzzle. There was no place for them in
the periodic table. Mendeléeff, in the book I
have named above, finds the difficulty merely the
introduction to a new and brilliant hypothesis.
All these inert gases form a new group or column
by themselves, and their atomic weights fit in
with this arrangement. But there are gaps in the
new column! To make the arrangement symmetrical
there should be two bodies lighter than helium.
And this condition of things harmonizes with a
belief Mendeléeff tells us he has long
entertained that there ought to be two
"elements," as yet unknown to science, lighter
than hydrogen. He boldly fills up these two gaps
with bodies x and y, and x, the lighter of the
two, he suggests, is the Ether!
This presentation of the idea by such an
illustrious representative of orthodox chemistry
as Mendeléeff will be of fascinating interest to
a group of thinkers on subjects of this kind,
towards whom, though they may seem as yet in the
vanguard of wild speculation, my sympathies are
inclined to lean. According to that view the
ether is the ultimate form of physical matter,
from which all the familiar varieties of matter
are derived. This view establishes the ether
really as the "protyle" of Crookes' famous
hypothesis as to "the Genesis of the Elements."
It seems to me that with Mendeléeff's help we are
bringing a lot of previously scattered
conceptions to a common focus. Arguing from the
analogies of the other columns, Mendeléeff

assigns to x, or the ether, an atomic weight (a
maximum value) of 0.17. Probably, he says, the
weight is far less, as analogy suggests that its
molecule contains only one atom. To interpret the
argument would involve the use of mathematical
formulae that would be out of place here, but it
helps to explain the fact that the ether pervades
all space, disregarding the attraction of
planets. The velocity of its atomic vibrations
would enable it to overcome gravitation. And the
dimensions of the etheric atoms would be of such
a minute order that they obviously may provide a
material basis for the unit charge of electricity
described as the electron, while this view of the
whole subject gets rid of what has always seemed
to me the monstrous absurdity of treating force
as atomic. One might as well talk of an atom of
gravitation.

ATOMS AND MISUNDERSTANDINGS
Science has so long been commandeered for the
service of the war, that in reference to some of
its pre-war achievements it has failed to make
further progress. Especially is this the case in
connection with the study of the electron, so
that a view I have long held to be a delusion,
and have often ventured to describe as such,
still commands general acquiescence. I rejoice,
therefore, to observe in America the dawn of a
clear understanding as to the real place in
Nature of that elusive particle. Sir J.J. Thomson
and others still persist in regarding it as an
atom of electricity. A long and, as it seems to
me, an extremely intelligent article appears in
The Scientific American, under the heading, "The
Relations of Matter and Ether." That all atoms of
physical matter, even the finest, those of
hydrogen, are built up each of many electrons, is
a practically established fact, though opinions
still differ widely as to the number of electrons
in each. Anyhow, these are supposed, quite

correctly in all probability, to move about
freely within the space included by the atom,
just as the planets of a solar system move about
within the space embraced by each solar system.
The article before me recognizes the electron as
thus the unit of physical matter, while agreeing
that it is also - or represents also - the unit
volume of electric force. It has a dual aspect. I
must here quote a few lines from the article to
show how the writer glides into the view I have
always maintained. "A question of moment here
arises. Can the corpuscles of the ether, its unit
particle, be smaller than this vastly minute
particle of matter? Are we not warranted in
suggesting that these may be in the same category
as far as size is concerned? Yet if this is
admitted as probable we cannot stop here. If
these excessively minute particles, the electron
and the ether corpuscles, are similar in size,
may they not be similar in other directions? In
short, may they not be identical?"
On the basis of this more than reasonable
hypothesis, the writer goes on to draw various
inferences. We start with the conception of the
ether as atomic in its constitution and filling
all space - the raw material from which all
physical matter is built up. May it not be
susceptible of existence in different states as
physical matter exists in the three states,
solid, liquid, and gaseous? Then the atomic
condition in which it fills all space and
transmits the vibrations of light and heat would
be its gaseous condition. In its liquid condition
it might roll up into drops analogous to those of
water, and become atoms of physical matter! I do
not find that idea at all helpful. A much simpler
and more natural view treats the aggregation of
etheric atoms into physical molecules as a
process accomplished by stages. Atomic ether does
not appeal to our physical senses. Evidently
there must be some minimum number of etheric
atoms in a molecule to render it so qualified.

Aggregations of lesser number would still remain
imperceptible to our senses. But it would be
extravagant to assume that Nature has no
activities outside those limits. The minor
aggregations of etheric atoms that do not come
within the range of our senses must constitute so
many varieties of molecular ether!
I have long been convinced that there are such
varieties of molecular ether, and when this comes
to be recognized it will open the door to a flood
of new speculation concerning the phenomena of
light, heat and colour. More than this, it will
put a new and greatly more nature-like complexion
on theories concerning the radiations from the
Sun. We are all familiar with the calculation
showing that the heat radiations of the Sun are
wasted to the extent of some ridiculous
percentage, because so little of them can
actually impinge upon the planets. Suppose no
heat is really wasted! - that what we call heat
is an effect developed by the molecular ether
surrounding each planet; that the vibrations of
the atomic ether of interstellar space are not
heat at all! I am not daring to assert this.
Future discovery may follow some quite different
line, but the discovery of molecular ether - at
present merely a profoundly plausible hypothesis
- arising from the discovery of the electron,
seems to me sure of accomplishment now science is
getting out of khaki after the war.
Certainly we shall have to improve our present
senses, or get some more, before we can expect to
be directly cognizant of molecular ether, but we
already deal with many natural phenomena beyond
the range of the senses. Invisible light and
inaudible sound are favourite subjects for
scientific letures. The ultra-violet rays can be
detected by the photographic plate; the note of a
whistle, too shrill to be heard, can be observed
by the sensitive flame. Over and above the debt
that optics in the future may owe to the

discovery of molecular ether, it may go a long
way towards breaking down the habit of
nineteenth-century science, which used to make it
so scornful of everything it could neither see,
hear, nor feel. For many men of science, and for
multitudes whose beliefs are based on personal
experience, the new senses requires to enable us
to penetrate the mysteries of Nature farther than
this has been done by merely physical researches,
are recognized as beginning to flicker about here
and there, and are loosely grouped under the
title "clairvoyance." They are already available
for scientific purposes. I hesitate no longer to
include the subject in the range of scientific
developments, partly because - as Sir Oliver
Lodge has put it - those who disbelieve in the
existence of clairvoyance do not express an
opinion, but merely show ignorance, and partly
because my own experience has very fully
confirmed that view. Vaguely most people imagine
that clairvoyance has to do with fortune-telling
and ghost stories. In reality it is sometimes
directed to genuine scientific research, and, for
example, to the study of the atom. Along this
line of inquiry it has been ascertained (if we
treat the method as reliable) that the number of
etheric atoms (or electrons) in an atom (or
molecule) of hydrogen is 18. Current scientific
guesses on the subject vary so widely that some
writers put the figure down as two or three, or
even one, while others soar in imagination to the
level of many thousands. The 18 theory is
supported along the line of research that gave
rise to it, by the observation of other atoms
besides those of hydrogen. Many have been
examined, and the result shows that in all such
cases the larger numbers identified with heavier
atoms, when divided by 18, give the recognized
atomic weights of the substances in question. The
discovery is full of deep significance. It shows
the etheric atom, minute as it is, to be actually
ponderable, and obviously supports the key number
18.

I freely grant that as yet the new senses
required for scientific clairvoyance are so
rarely found in adequate perfection, that they
cannot be checked by use in different
laboratories. But if a gradual prima facie belief
in their occasional existence gains ground,
efforts will assuredly be made to cultivate the
faculty where it exists in embryo, and by degrees
true scientific research will certainly be pushed
beyond that Threshold of the Unseen that Sir
William Barret writes about with remarkable
effect.

ARCHÆOLOGY
RELICS OF ANTIQUITY
FROM Central America, south of Mexico, as the
country narrows towards the Isthmus of Panama,
the peninsula of Yucatan stretches out eastward.
It is not a region that tempts civilized
immigrants. The climate is not specially
unhealthy, but too hot to be pleasant. Its halfmillion or so of primitive inhabitants have no
mineral wealth. Nature endows them with mahoganytrees and tolerates tobacco, cotton, and the
sugar-cane; but the only product which Yucatan
sells to the outer world is henequin, a kind of
hemp used in the manufacture of coarse sackcloth
and hammocks. Yet from one point of view, that of
the archæologist, Yucatan is one of the most
interesting regions in the world. It links us
with a past that lies far behind the few thousand
years that engage the attention of the
Egyptologist, and puts us in touch with a period
of the Earth's history which used to be regarded
as entirely mythical, but has emerged from that
comfortless moral atmosphere and is now accorded
a grudging recognition by orthodox geology. The
fundamental fact that the Atlantic basin must
once have been, for the most part, continental
land, would no longer offend any modern
geologist. The idea used to be ridiculed, but is
now treated as a matter of course. Plato,
however, is so far only partially vindicated.
Geology tolerates the theory that there must once
have been an Atlantean land, but declines to have
anything to do with the theory that it was
inhabited. This is the stage in the development
of prehistoric knowledge at which Yucatan comes
in. And I am tempted to deal with the subject
because one number of the Scientific American has
an article about the antiquities of Yucatan that
may help to get attention focused on their
enormous significance.

Yucatan, says the writer, can well be called the
American Egypt. The ruins of 172 cities, big and
little, have been discovered, and not a quarter
of the territory has been explored. Tropical
vegetation makes the work difficult. "You might
pass within a hundred feet of a wonderful old
temple or pyramid a hundred times, and not
discover it, so effectively does the jungle
screen these crumbling monuments of the distant
past." The article goes on to tell us that some
of these ruins must once have been large cities,
with not less than half a million inhabitants in
each one. The writer, who seems to have had
personal experience, has found one pyramid the
most interesting among all these relics of the
past. The steps on one side are fairly well
preserved, and at the top is a platform, which
was the sacrificial altar. There the priests "cut
out the hearts of living victims." In a great
quadrangle at the foot of the pyramid the
inhabitants of the city used to gather to watch
"these festal doings." Around were the "palaces"
of nuns, "for whose special delectation these
sacrifices were made. The nuns were the
aristocrats of ancient Maya society."
The writer does not tell us from what authorities
he derives his information, but anyone who wants
to study the subject further will find all he
needs in the books of Dr. Le Plongeon (an
American archæologist, though with a French
name), who devoted his life to the study of
Mexican, and especially Yucatan, antiquities, and
did much more than merely describe remains.
These, like the antiquities of Egypt, are covered
to a large extent with inscriptions in
hieroglyphic character. The hieroglyphics seem
the same as those used in Egypt, but the
Egyptologists could make nothing of them.
Egyptian hieroglyphics became intelligible when
the Rosetta stone showed what language they
spelled. But they certainly did not spell Coptic

in Yucatan. The discovery of the language they
did spell is the splendid gift Le Plongeon
bestowed on the archæological world, and because
the results offended the prejudices of the period
(still clinging to the idea that Atlantis was a
fable), they were never properly appreciated. But
the scientific mind at the present day is more
accessible to new views, which sometimes involve
the restoration of very old views, and the stone
inscriptions of Yucatan are already establishing
some broad conclusions respecting the people of
the old Atlantic continent, compared to whom the
earliest Egyptian and Chaldean civilizations were
recent stages of human history. In several places
Le Plongeon came upon inscriptions plainly
describing the final catastrophe that submerged
the last great surviving fragment of the old
Atlantean continent. The date of the catastrophe
is even given with precision. It took place 8060
years before the period at which the event was
recorded. Plausible guesses as to the date of the
inscriptions add about 3500 years to the 8000
odd, so it was about 9000 B.C. when the
stupendous cataclysm took place. And that only
affected the last then remaining fragment of the
original continent. Yucatan again helps us to
realize in some measure what it must have been in
its entirety. I was once intimate with a friend,
who has since passed away, who was engaged in
important mining operations in Mexico. He told me
that in the course of explorations in that
country and Yucatan, bits of an old road had been
discovered in the midst of what seemed primeval
jungle. These made a dotted line on the map which
extended down through Yucatan, ending abruptly at
the sea coast. But again, farther on, bits were
discovered on islands lying out at sea. Evidently
the old road connected the cities of Mexico and
Yucatan with other important centres in regions
now covered by the Atlantic Ocean. Inscriptions
deciphered by Le Plongeon relate to events
happening in that region. One of his books deals
with the history of a certain "Queen Moo" of the

far-away past, who was driven from her dominions
by usurping brothers, and migrated by a long
overland journey to Egypt, where among other
doings she introduced the Sphinx as an emblem
that had previously been what we would call the
crest of her family. When the world is at leisure
again to concern itself with matters of mere
intellectual interest, we may profit by renewed
researches in Yucatan to the extent of framing a
much more complete history of the Atlantean
period; but we shall have to get into the habit
of thinking in millions, instead of thousands, of
years before we can map out in our minds the
stupendous periods through which human evolution
has passed. Americans do things thoroughly
sometimes; and if they begin to realize that,
while the youngest of the great nations in one
way, they are also geographically the oldest,
they may find it worth while to devote national
efforts to the further development of the work
which one of their own countrymen, Le Plongeon,
has begun so well. They are apparently waking up
to the interests of archæology if their leading
scientific paper, the Scientific American, can be
regarded as showing the direction of the wind.
Besides its Yucatan article, recent numbers deal
at length with the antiquities of Ceylon, though
these relate to the yesterdays of the world
compared with the remains of cities and pyramids
hidden in the jungles of Yucatan.

CATACLYSMS AND EARTHQUAKES
EVERYTHING, says a familiar proverb, comes to
those who wait, even the vindication, at the
hands of exoteric science, of information
acquired from the great teachers of occultism,
however widely this may seem, at first sight, at
variance with conventional views. Within the last
few years, something fresh has come out about
earthquakes which has an important bearing on the
physical history of this world, as interpreted by
esoteric teaching and investigation. Almost
everything that stands written in encyclopædias
and popular textbooks concerning earthquakes is
now out of date, and under the highest scientific
auspices we are introduced to a view of this
subject that begins to be in harmony with
Nature's records in reference to the great
geographical catastrophes that from time to time
have altered the face of the globe.
The modern world is indebted to Japan for having
done most up to the present time in the direction
of elucidating the mystery of earthquakes.
Certainly Japan has been better qualified than
any other country to take a leading part in this
investigation. It is favoured, if that phrase be
admissible, with opportunities for studying
earthquakes which no other country enjoys. On an
average Japan endures three a day, not always on
the scale of that which, in 1891, destroyed
10,000 lives, and involved the Government in an
expenditure of 30 million dollars on repairs, but
at all events of one kind or another. Perhaps for
scientific purposes the little earthquakes are
most useful. When towns are shivering in ruins,
and railway viaducts being tied up in knots, the
most zealous seismologist may get confused in his
observations. But anyhow, taking all sorts
together, Japan has plenty of seismological
material to work with. The examination of this
has become an intellectual fashion in Japan, and
a seismograph is as common an article of luxury

in a Japanese household as a mantelpiece clock
with us. The Government has liberally subsidized
the investigation, and a distinguished English
engineer for some time past occupied what may be
called the Chair of Earthquakes at the Tokio
University.
Professor Milne, the engineer in question, has
thus become the leading authority on earthquakes,
and as such he lectured at the Royal Institution
on Friday evening, a few years ago. In the hour
he had at his disposal he did not survey the
various hypotheses that have been put forward
from time to time to account for earthquakes, but
it may be worth while to glance at these here,
for the benefit of readers unfamiliar with the
subject.
The volcanic theory has perhaps been most in
favour. Earthquakes, it has been assumed, have
been underground disturbances that have not been
near enough to the surface to break out as
eruptions, but have nevertheless shaken and
dislocated the upper strata. Another notion has
been that they were due to the influx of seawater into internal cavities in the crust of the
Earth. Steam, at a high temperature, it was
supposed, would be engendered in this way, and an
earthquake would ensue on the principle of an
explosion in a steam-boiler. Yet another theory
suggested the reaction of certain chemical
ingredients coming into contact in the interior
cavities of the Earth's crusts. Gases at a high
pressure were thus supposed to be developed, and
hence the explosive energy displayed. All these
conjectures are equally dispelled by the results
of the Japanese investigations. Professor Milne
did not think it was worth while even to notice
the steam and chemical theories, but he paid the
volcanic theory the compliment of a specific
repudiation. We have arrived at the conclusion,
he declared, that earthquakes have nothing
whatever to do with volcanoes. They are not local

phenomena at all, not due to causes engendered in
the neighbourhood where they occur, but to great
waves or pulsations to which the crust of the
earth is constantly subject, the effect of which
is not perceived unless some rupture ensues. The
huge, slow waves or undulations are described in
the new terminology of earthquake science as
"bradyseismic" disturbances, and they are going
on just as freely and steadily in quiet regions,
where earthquakes in the ordinary sense of the
word are unknown, as in regions like Japan, or
the west ocean of South America, where they are
frequent. But now and then it happens that as the
bradyseismic wave encounters some irregular
resistance or weakness in strata it disturbs,
something gives way, something cracks, and then a
shiver goes through the region where that occurs.
Such a shiver may in a few moments destroy
property worth millions, and lives by the
thousand.
Another influence productive of earthquake
disturbance is described by Professor Milne as a
"secular crush and flow." Observation has shown
how wonderfully responsive the solid earth is to
changes of weight pressing upon it. The
deposition and evaporation of dew in the evening
produces a sensible movement of the ground sensible, that is to say, to the new and
delicately adjusted seismographs in use for such
observations. What, then, must be the effect of
the regular denudation of continents that is
always going on, and of the deposition of the mud
carried down by rivers on the bottom of the sea?
The latest conjecture is that this pressure is
sufficient to cause an actual flow of solid rock
away from the regions of greatest pressure. We
know, of course, that solid and viscous are
merely relative expressions. Treacle is only more
viscous than lead, which in the ordinary course
of bullet-making is now squeezed, cold, out of
holes by hydraulic pressure, and flows like so
much putty. Lead is only more viscous than steel.

Ice, it is now suggested, is only more viscous
than granite. Every solid substance is viscous in
one degree or another. Imagine a thick, evenly
spread bed of soft clay; then imagine a weight
put down on any part of the surface. One sees at
once that the weight would sink into the clay,
more or less, and that part of the clay beneath
would be squeezed out laterally, heaving up the
surface elsewhere. That is just what takes place
in connection with the secular flow of the
Earth's lower strata, and here we get into
relations with a second great cause of
earthquakes, the effect of which, in causing a
rupture of the superior strata somewhere, is
similar, apparently, to the effect of the
bradyseismic wave.
As a matter of fact, earthquakes are most
numerous in those parts of the world where the
seashore falls very abruptly into deep ocean.
That occurs to the eastward of Japan, and also on
the western side of South America. But one of the
most interesting facts now brought to light is
that wherever an earthquake takes place the shock
of it is really felt all over the rest of the
world. The vibration passes, apparently, through
the solid body of the Earth. We must leave off
talking about the crust of the Earth. That phrase
is derived from an early hypothesis that has been
discredited for a long while - that has been at
variance with all the physical teaching
permeating theosophical information, and is now
clearly untenable in the light of the new
seismology. The whole body of the Earth is
plainly capable of transmitting vibrations of the
kind that are transmitted by matter of the utmost
rigidity. There is evidence to show that the
earthquake waves are communicated from one part
of the world to another with definite velocities,
and they do not make their way round the globe,
they pass through it by the most direct line that
can be drawn from one point to another. The rate
at which the vibrations are transmitted is

extraordinarily high, in some instances
approaching a speed of twelve kilometres per
second, or double the rate at which a wave of
compression could pass through steel or glass.
Further than this, if this direct line passes
only through a shallow segment of the Earth, the
rate of transmission is less rapid than if it
passes through a greater mass. That is to say,
the most rapid transmission would be straight
through, from any given point to its antipodal
point. I say "would be" because up to the present
time seismological observations have not been
carried out extensively enough to have provided
for antipodal stations corresponding to the
regions of most frequent disturbance, but the
character of all observations that have been made
at places widely separated indicates an
increasing velocity in direct ratio with the
depth through the earth followed by the course of
transmission.
The trustworthiness of the inferences already
arrived at as regards the rate at which the
vibrations travel, is shown by the fact that
already it is possible to tell, from observations
in England, at what moment an earthquake has
taken place in Japan. At Professor Milne's
seismological observatory in the Isle of Wight,
he has been enabled on some occasions to
anticipate the announcements of the telegraph in
reference to earthquakes in Japan. Once he
announced - before any telegraphic news had been
received - that such an event had taken place on
a certain date, at such and such an hour and
minute. When the news came in the ordinary course
of things, it turned out that he had been right
within an error of one minute only. In another
case, when the papers announced that a great
earthquake had taken place at Kobe, his
instruments had given no indications to
correspond. He declared the news to be
inaccurate, and in due time it turned out to have
been without foundation.

The importance of all this as bearing on
questions in which theosophical students are
interested, has to do with the light it throws on
the old standing question of cataclysms. The
drift of conventional scientific thinking for
some time past has been in the direction of what
geologists call uniformity. We do not see
cataclysms going around us at present, but we do
see the gradual operation of forces that over
very long periods of time may be supposed capable
of superinducing the changes of land and water
distribution that must assuredly take place. Rain
and the rivers are continually washing down the
soil of continents to the sea. In this way ocean
beds are being filled up, and exising land
surfaces denuded. Shores in some places are being
eaten away by the sea, and in other places slowly
raised, so that former beaches are now hoisted
half-way up high cliffs. In time, it is supposed
by the uniformitarians, these gradual processes
would suffice to account for the largest changes
we like to imagine. They would not account,
however, for the violent convulsions of which
theosophical teachers speak as having happened in
the past and of which, indeed, advancing
theosophical students, beginning to be able to
apply their own powers of observation to remote
historical investigation, are enabled to speak
with much detail. Those of us who comprehend the
trustworthiness of investigation of that sort may
have no doubt about the fact, whether modern
science yet recognizes it or not; but it is
always gratifying to derive from modern science
confirmation of theosophic teaching. And while
the local theory of earthquakes held the field,
no such confirmation was forthcoming in reference
to such events in the past as the destruction of
Atlantis. Now we begin to perceive along what
road the ultimate developments of physical
knowledge will converge towards the conclusions
of occult investigation. The bradyseismical waves
of the new seismology fit in perfectly with a

belief that, at long intervals of time, natural
convulsions may occur on a very much larger scale
than that of any which have been recorded within
historic periods. Some of these, of course, have
been fairly big. The Lisbon catastrophe not only
killed 60,000 people at the seat of its chief
activity, but distributed its influence
perceptibly over an area, according to Humboldt's
calculation, four times as great as Europe. As we
know now, its influence must really have been
felt all over the world, though in distant places
too slightly to be measured by instruments then
in use. The Calabrian earthquake of 1783
destroyed 40,000 lives. But, after all, disasters
of this magnitude are not commensurable with the
least of the great Atlantean catastrophes.
According to the Troano manuscript, translated by
Dr. Le Plongeon, sixty million people perished in
the final Poseidonis convulsion, which changed an
inhabited territory, measuring over two thousand
miles one way by about one thousand two hundred
the other, into so much ocean bed. For people to
whom the six or seven thousand years of the
historic period seem to afford a good basis for
generalization, it naturally appears unlikely
that if our Lisbon earthquake is the champion
convulsion for that period, anything so out of
proportion with it should have taken place six or
seven thousand years earlier.
The bradyseismic wave system, taken in
conjunction with the secular flow of rocks, puts
a new complexion on all such speculation.
Everything we know about vibrations tends to show
that in Nature these movements are superimposed
one upon another. In electrical phenomena this is
certainly the case, and in fact the whole
principle of multiplex telegraphy is built upon
that idea. Occult investigation into the nature
of the ultimate atom points to the same kind of
complexity there. In the motion of the planetary
bodies we have to recognize similar movements
within movements. The diurnal rotation of the

Earth is superimposed upon the much slower
precessional, or second rotation. Whatever the
great pulsations of the Earth's surface may be
due to, it is more than imaginable that a larger
and slower pulsation passes through it at longer
intervals. Earthquakes of the secondary order,
like those which afflicted Lisbon in the last
century, are due apparently to a rupture of some
rock body giving way to the pressure of one of
the relatively minor undulations of the strata
below. A pulsation of greater magnitude may
easily be supposed to create a superficial
disturbance on a different scale altogether, one
for which, perhaps, a long-continued operation of
the secular rock flow has prepared the way.
In addressing theosophical readers, a word or two
seems desirable here on the question whether such
catastrophes as those of the Atlantean age should
be attributed to causes of uniform regularity, or
to the intervention of the highest authorities
connected with the government of the world, at
crises when the depravity of mankind renders the
extinction of life on a large scale a necessity
of the situation. The destruction of Atlantis has
generally been talked of with reference to some
such intervention. But everything we learn about
the evolution of the race to which we belong
points to the synchronism between the regular
progress of natural law and the development of
crises in human destiny. The recognition of this
synchronism will not interfere with our
simultaneous recognition of free will as regards
the individual. No one is bound to give way to
the temptations of his race or period in
evolution, but taking the stupendous numbers
concerned into account, it is certain that so
many, within a limit of error, will follow the
stream, while so many will strike out a path for
themselves. In Atlantean ages the course of the
stream was in a direction which, at all events
for us, would be the direction of evil. Sooner or
later it was inevitable that a condition of

things should be developed which would require a
violent remedy. One need hardly be surprised to
find that the remedy under those circumstances
was provided for by a geological crisis, towards
which the Earth's strata had been moving all the
while that the Atlantean majority were working
out the moral necessity of their own destruction.

POETRY AND THEOSOPHY
A RECENT article in the Theosophist deals with a
subject that has often engaged my thoughts. Much
poetry is deplorably unspiritual by reason of
treating death as a dismal finality, instead of
being the gateway to new life - "Mors janua
vitæ." As Mr. Cousins puts it, a "revolution in
Western literary arts would be brought about if
the idea, say of reincarnation, could be given as
full a place in thought as the current idea of a
single life." I quite agree, but meanwhile a
grand result would be achieved if poetry could
help the world to realize that before attaining
reincarnation, there is a period of happiness in
the more immediate future awaiting all decent
people on the astral plane. In our earlier
teaching this was a good deal slurred over, as
still wider aspects of truth claimed
interpretation first. But in a recent book, In
the Next World, I have endeavoured to show how
vivid, delightful, and fairly protracted may be
that astral experience preceding not merely the
return to physical life, but preceding any
experiences on higher planes that may await any
given Ego. Therefore, the first great poetical
reform I should like to see would be one that
should encourage thought to range beyond the
grave, instead of burrowing incessantly in that
unimportant region.
Consider, for instance, one of the most beautiful
passages in all poetry, Moore's "Farewell to
Araby's Daughter" at the end of The Fireworshippers. Its beauty resides entirely in the
form, not in the substance. It is altogether a
lament. Its exquisite language is concerned
entirely with the dear girl's body lying at the
bottom of the sea. The Peris who speak the dirge
are solely engaged with their efforts to beautify
its bed.

Farewell - be it ours to embellish thy pillow
With everything beauteous that grows in the deep.
Each flower of the rock and each gem of the billow
Shall sweeten thy bed and illumine thy sleep.
Around thee
That ever
With many a
We, Peris
We'll
And
We'll
And

shall glisten the loveliest amber
the sorrowing seabird has wept,
shell in whose hollow-wreathed chamber
of ocean, by moonlight have slept.

dive where the gardens of coral lie darkling,
plant all the rosiest stems at thy head,
seek where the sands of the Caspian are sparkling
gather their gold to strew over thy bed.

For pure mellifluous beauty of expression those
verses will rank with anything in literature, but
what a ghastly blunder it was for Moore to spend
his genius on thoughts about the dead girl's
body, instead of thinking about the girl! I have
endeavoured to suggest a paraphrase of his superb
effusion - what he might have given us instead if
he had come within the range of Theosophical
teaching. To guard against misunderstanding, let
me explain that I am not supposing that any
rhymes of mine can rival Moore's in form. Moore imperfectly appreciated in these days - was,
among all poets that have ever lived, the supreme
master of versification. Tennyson, a far grander
poet as regards thought, has here and there
touched Moore's perfection of form, but, as a
composer of music in words, Moore is facile
princeps. My effort is a concrete expression of
wonder as to what might have been the character
of his "Farewell" had he known what (I think) I
know about life immediately after death. Here are
the verses. They are not a "Farewell," but a
"Greeting."
Welcome, thrice welcome, O Araby's daughter!
A glad voice thus greeted her advent above.
The form cast away in Oman's green water
Is needed no more in this bright real of love.

'Twas fair for a while, giving transient expression
For Earth's passing use to a soul pure and white,
But that is now rescued from fleshly possession
Arrayed in a far fairer vesture of light.
That agonized plunge in the dark dreary ocean
Was no coward flight from pain, peril, or strife;
A gift to your lover, an act of devotion,
A sacrifice laid on the altar of life.
The World left behind you will weep o'er your story,
Will fancy that You lie asleep in the wave;
For you that has proved but the gateway of glory,
The dawn of new life wih the pure and the brave
They bid you farewell, those who mourn your wild daring,
They shudder to think of your cold, lonely bed.
Oh! could we but tell them how well you are faring,
They'd share in your joy now your body is dead.
In depths of the sea that will soon melt and vanish,
On heights of the Astral your beauty revives,
The grief that once marred it this glow will soon banish,
With all that disfigured Earth's lowlier lives.
Nor shall you be saddened to think of their sadness
Who even may weep at your pitiful fate;
Now weeping, the better they'll share in your gladness
When they too inherit the life they await.
No graven stone tells where the form that once bound you
Restores to the Earth, from the Earth what it drew;
How little you care, as the scenes now around you
Enchant your new senses with limitless view.
But see! who approaches? Reborn with new vigour,
How needless 'twas even his fate to deplore,
With rapture he sees you! No flames could disfigure
That form. It is he! 'tis your lover once more.

There are many other well-known poems dealing
with death that might be recast along similar
lines: "The Burial of Sir John Moore," for
example, though those rather ponderous verses do
not attract one to the task. Poetry, indeed, is
dotted all over with blemishes due to ignorance
of astral conditions, and perhaps it may be
admitted that even Theosophical literature, apart

from poetry altogether, has sometimes tended to
chill imagination by leaving too much out of
account the gradual character of the transition
from this life towards the illimitable future of
human evolution. Natural law is very patient with
the pardonable cravings of personality, and lofty
teaching is sometimes made to seem repellent by
neglecting this profound truth, as was
illustrated by a remark I once heard of, made by
a lady who said she was much attracted to
Theosophy but could not be a Theosophist because
she loved her husband and her children! Once can
easily understand the peculiar variety of
foolishness on the part of some ill-qualified
exponent of Theosophy who gave her that
impression. The charms of the higher astral life
ought to find more frequent description in
Theosophical literature, as well as in the poetry
of the future.

NOTE
THE substance of some of the various essays in
this book has appeared in The Nineteenth Century,
The Messenger (California), The Vahan, The
Pioneer (Allahabad), Lucifer, and The
Theosophist. "Expanded Theosophical Knowledge"
was originally published as a pamphlet by the
Theosophical Book Shop, 42, George Street,
Edinburgh. "Theosophical Teachings Liable to be
Misunderstood" and "The Pyramids and Stonehenge"
appear among the Transactions of the London Lodge
of the Theosophical Society. The substance of the
"Super-Physical Laws of Nature" and "The Higher
Occultism" was delivered in addresses to the
Eleusinian Society, since merged in the London
Lodge of the Theosophical Society.

______________________________________
BILLING AND SONS, LTD., PRINTERS, GUILDFORD, ENGLAND.

